
developmental homoplasy


## The origin and evolution of cell types
    [@doi:10.1038/nrg.2016.127]
    
terminal selectors:  a novel and unique combination of transcription factors, which establish a cell type identity 

sister cell types: "Dopaminergic neurons and the glutamatergic neurons of the subthalamic nucleus (STN) are different, but share similar signatures"

core regulatory complex’ (CoRC) of transcription factors, that make emergent sister cell types distinct, enable their independent evolution and regulate cell type-specific traits termed apomeres.

apomeres cell type specific modules.

synapomeres if descendant sister cell types undergo additional rounds of evolutionary diversification. 

cell type homology due to inheritance from a common precursor


concerted evolution (of cell types) occurs through mutations affecting genetic information used by multiple cell types

regulatory signature / character identity : The full set of terminal selectors driving differentiation, together with microRNAs, splicing complexes and any
other regulatory mechanism that establishes and maintains the differential use of genomic information of a cell within the organism.

serial sister cell types

Cell type homology: Cell types that trace back to the same cell type in a common ancestor.

Cell phenotypic convergence: Cell types that are
phenotypically similar due to independent changes occurring in separate evolutionary lineages.

Concerted evolution: Similar phenotypic changes that occur simultaneously across different cell types of the same species as a result of altering genetic information shared among the cell types.

## The evolution of cell types in animals: emerging principles from molecular studies
    [@doi:10.1038/nrg2416]
    
typogenetic tree 

cell typogenesis:  evolutionary diversification of cell type

‘Recombination’ between cell types" as a mechanism to form new cell types in the end highlights the notion of intersected cell types

## Defining cell types and states with single-cell genomics
    \cite{trapnell2015defining
    
attractor is a location in the state space of a dynamical system that will move toward and to which it will return if perturbed. (" what we think of as distinct cell types correspond to attractors of that system (Kauffman 1993)"

## Key transitions during the evolution of animal phototransduction: novelty, "tree-thinking," co-option, and co-duplication. 
    [10.1093/icb/icm050]
    
bricolage/tinkering:  novel traits originate as new combinations of existing traits

## Mapping the transcriptional diversity of genetically and anatomically defined cell populations in the mouse brain
    \cite{[@doi:10.7554/eLife.38619]
    
Pan-neuronal genes (genes expressed commonly in all neuronal populations but expressed at lower levels or not at all in nonneuronal cell populations.

GACPs: ## Mapping the transcriptional diversity of genetically and anatomically defined cell populations in the mouse brain
    \cite{[@doi:10.7554/eLife.38619]
    
## Terminal Selectors of Neuronal Identity
    [@doi:10.1016/bs.ctdb.2015.12.007]    
Given the neuron identity-defining properties, I proposed to call these transcription factors “terminal selectors.This terminology is an extension of the selector gene concept, originally proposed by Garcia-Bellido (1975).

## PanglaoDB: a web server for exploration of mouse and human single-cell RNA sequencing data
    \cite{citation

In such cases it is possible to compare if the predicted cell type matches the ‘biological’ cell type. We identified 17 independent datasets with homogeneous cell-type populations, where the biological cell type has been reported (this

 species-neutral cell types

## An improved ontological representation of dendritic cells as a paradigm for all cell types
[@doi:10.1186/1471-2105-10-70]

## Cell type nomenclature for the mammalian brain: Development and application of a systematic, extensible convention
    [@arxiv:2006.05406]

    - Provisional cell type: Quantitatively-derived data cluster defined within a tax- onomy. Sometimes called “cell type” here for simplicity
    - Cell set accession ID: A unique ID across all tracked datasets and taxonomies. This tag labels the taxonomy and numbers each cell type. [taxonomy id][unique # within taxonomy] -CS1910121201
    - Cell set alias: Any cell set descriptor (e.g., what cell types are called in a paper). It can be defined computationally based on the data, or manually based on prior knowledge or new experiments, or a combination of both:
        -ADARB2 (CGE) 
        -Inh L1-2 PAX6 CDH12
        -Chandelier
    - Cell set label: An ID unique within a single taxonomy that contains a biological term that ideally is included in a relevant cell ontology. In some cases, it may be redundant with accession ID. [Canonical cell type][unique # within canonical cell type] -Neuron 12 
    - Cell set preferred alias:  Analogous to “gene symbol”. At most one biologically- driven name for linking matching cell sets across taxonomies and with a reference taxonomy. 
        -L2/3 IT 4
        -Pvalb 3 
        -Microglia 2
