# Classification systems

# Classification systems

## A periodic table of cell types
    [@doi:10.1242/dev.169854 ]
    
### Highlights
Propose a ‘periodic table of cell types’ can be as a framework for distinguishing cell types from cell states, in which the different states of the same cell type are analogous to ‘isotopes’

Shape  has long been used as the dominant feature for defining the identities and functions of different cell types.

Concepts now include markers, cell surface proteins, secretion molecules, transcription factors, as well as cell functions and tissue enrichment.

Need for the a robust formal framework for the ‘cell type’ concept, the definition of a cell type based upon a few features or marker genes may not be sufficient.

In previous studies, the expression profile of TFs was good at distinguishing cell-type identities across multiple organs.

Cell state is a modular addition of a regulatory program to a CoRC (which defines the identity of the cell type.

TFs may be absent in in mature cells, making it difficult to classify. 

Cell types can be divided in 3 phases: stem cell; progenitor; differentiated phase.For each, we can have informative ‘milestone cell types’ for example hemangioblasts (HABs).

Cells (like fibroblasts) found in multiple tissues and/or organs may not be exactly the same. These differences represent different cell states.

Cell types from different lineages may have have similar functions (developmental homoplasy). Cells originating from different developmental trajectories may converge to identical CoRC-defined cell types. 


The periodic table of cell types would differ across species.The table should be taken as just a summary of our existing knowledge of cell types. T

### Comments

 "With such a periodic table of cell types, we can annotate each cell
type with biological information, including organ system, cell morphology, cell abundance and the composition of its epigenome and transcriptome." --> You do not need a periodic table for that!


Analogously, the periodic table of cell types could be used to predict a species’ missing cell types, based on the biological logic of development and differentiation. --> I was not able to think of a possible prediction. 

In general, they present a tree-like structure with supra classifications. It is a calling for standardization, although the analogy with a periodic table is useful as a toy model, but misleading. To start, there is no periodicity and there is no table. 

Talks about a periodic table of C. elegans, but does not build it. 




## Universal Cell Type Identifier Based on Number Theory
[@doi:10.1002/cyto.a.23346]
### Highlights

The advent of high multiplexing technologies increased the complexity of the classifica- tion process and new tools are needed to support the organization of this knowledge. I propose a classification based on both prime numbers and the fundamental theorem of arithmetic.

CELL types are classified by the presence or absence of specific markers expressed intracellularly or at the cell surface.

Cells are additionally classified in hierarchical struc- tures where each level represents cells defined by the addition of successive layer of markers. These hierarchical structures may reflect haematopoiesis and, therefore, inform about the origin and differentiation pathway of the cells. Moreover, cell populations may be identified with different degree of resolution, that is, by an increasing number of markers all specific for a selected cell type.

The marker is a quite well-defined concept: a given antibody recognizes a protein that is usually translated by a known RNA and transcribed by a known gene. On the contrary, the cell population is a vague concept.

The nonprime number 17662215891311 is factorized as 19 3 23 3 151 3 277 3 9832 thus univocally defining a population of regulatory T-cells characterized as CD31, CD41, CD251, CD451, and CD1272.

Nevertheless, both databases and ontologies are created subjectively without a systematic approach and rely on critical literature reading by expert in the field. Both systems require a clear definition of a cell population that is usually a name given by experts in the field.

Each marker listed in the “CD Nomenclature 2015” was associated to a prime number according to a one to one relationship.

Since sometimes cell types are defined as negative for certain markers, I propose to integrate this information by simply squaring the prime associated to the negative marker.

A more detailed definition could be achieved for population defined as expressing a marker at a “medium”/ “low” level by simply cubing the prime.

In any case, a unique natural number (UNN) will univocally define the population.

The PPS assures unique name assumption (UNA) on the basis of a list of markers associated to a list of prime numbers.

Nevertheless, I hope this manuscript will inspire the single cell community toward a standardization of cell type nomenclature based on the number theory.

### Comments
## Title
[@doi:]
### Highlights



### Comments