# Immune

## Heterogeneity of neutrophils
    [@doi:10.1038/s41577-019-0141-8]
    
### Highlights

Immunity functions through the concerted actions of diverse cell types with specialized tasks

% Cell types or cells??
Hence, a central goal of modern immunology has been to catalogue cells in an effort to unify observations, generate hypotheses and propose basic biological principles

However, ‘naming’ subsets creates rules and restrictions that typically prevent capturing the true biology of a cell. This observation is particularly evident for‘plastic’ immune cells, for which the capacity to adapt to environmental changes is a defining property


Neutrophils are traditionally defined as a type of myeloid cell with a short half- life, specific nuclear morphology, defined granule content and surface expression of markers, such as the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-linked
receptor Ly6G in mice or CD66b in humans.

% Conceptual definition which cannot be applied in practice: how to know that any given cell matches these characteristics??

neutrophils have been described in a variety of 'flavours'
% Simply different cell types

In this Opinion article, we present
a critical discussion of neutrophil heterogeneity

Neutrophils are the most abundant circulating leukocytes in humans.

Historically, granulocyte precursors in humans have been defined from density gradients followed by histological inspection of the different fractions upon Giemsa staining9

Three neutrophil subsets within the mouse bone marrow: a committed proliferative precursor, termed a pre- neutrophil, which sequentially differentiates into non- proliferating immature and mature neutrophils.

In addition to the various types of immature neutrophils at different stages of maturation, the bone marrow is also a site for recycling of circulating neutrophils, at least in mice. Indeed, a large fraction of mature neutrophils that have aged in the circulation are recruited back to the bone marrow with circadian frequency.

Under steady-state conditions, neutrophils and other leukocyte subsets are released from the bone marrow and circulate for about half a day before infiltrating tissues.

Although the relatively short time of neutrophils in the blood would suggest homogeneous properties of these cells, marked diurnal changes in phenotype do occur, a phenomenon referred to as neutrophil ageing.

Notably, these features are significantly blunted in the early morning in mice, when neutrophils are recently released from the bone marrow. This finding suggests that neutrophils adjust their functions to the changing demands of the day — for example, to protect from microbial invasions during the animal’s active phase (when the exposure to pathogens is highest) or to exert reparative functions during the resting phase. 

% That is of utmost importance! How many articles state in which circadian moment an statement is valid?
% Whenever the times of collection are not randomized, this introduces systematic bias! 

at circadian clock genes also regulate the diurnal variations in phenotype and function in a cell- intrinsic manner34
through a process similar to that reported for inflammatory monocytes40

Do tissue- specific neutrophils exist?

% Obviously 

marginal zoneneutrophils in the human spleen adopt unique B cell-stimulating properties through the secretion of cytokines, chemoattractants and the pattern recognition receptor pentraxin 3 that stimulate class switch recombination and immunoglobulin production by B cells that reside in this region54,55
.

### Comments

References fluctuate between human, mouse or general "neutrophils".

## Natural killer cell immunotypes related to COVID-19 disease severity
[@doi:]
### Highlights
Unsupervised high-dimensional analysis of peripheral blood NK cells furthermore identified distinct NK cell immunotypes that were linked to disease severity.

NK cells are innate effector lymphocytes that are typically divided into cytokine-producing CD56bright NK cells and cytotoxic CD56dim NK cells.
patients with moderate and severe COVID-19 disease were recruited early during their disease, sampled for peripheral blood, and analyzed by 28-color flow cytometry to assess NK cell activation, education, and presence of adaptive NK cells

gating strategy in fig. S1A
K) HLA-E expression from scRNA-seq data of the indicated cell types.

CMV-seropositive healthy controls and COVID-19 patients dis- playing more than 5% of NKG2C+CD57+ cells within their CD56dim NK cell population were considered to have adaptive NK cell expansions.

Preprocessed scRNA-seq data were obtained from a published dataset (24). CD8 T cells were excluded from down- stream NK cell analyses based on k-means clustering of CD8 and NK cell markers from the human cell atlas PBMC benchmarking dataset (57), followed by renormalization of the data.
--> What?

24. M. Liao, Y. Liu, J. Yuan, Y. Wen, G. Xu, J. Zhao, L. Cheng, J. Li, X. Wang, F. Wang, L. Liu, I. Amit, S. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Single-cell landscape of bronchoalveolar immune cells in patients with COVID-19. Nat. Med. 26, 842–844 (2020).

E. Mereu, A. Lafzi, C. Moutinho, C. Ziegenhain, D. J. McCarthy, A. Alvarez-Varela, E. Batlle, Sagar, D. Grün, J. K. Lau, S. C. Boutet, C. Sanada, A. Ooi, R. C. Jones, K. Kaihara, C. Brampton, Y. Talaga, Y. Sasagawa, K. Tanaka, T. Hayashi, C. Braeuning, C. Fischer, S. Sauer, T. Trefzer, C. Conrad, X. Adiconis, L. T. Nguyen, A. Regev, J. Z. Levin, S. Parekh, A. Janjic, L. E. Wange, J. W. Bagnoli, W. Enard, M. Gut, R. Sandberg, I. Nikaido, I. Gut, O. Stegle, H. Heyn, Benchmarking single-cell RNA-sequencing protocols for cell atlas projects. Nat. Biotechnol. 38, 747–755 (2020).

Fig. S1. NK cell differentiation in COVID-19 disease

Lymphocytes by SSC-A and FSC-A.

Singlets by FSC-A and FSC-H / SSC-A and SSC-H.

"CD14/CD19/DCM (?) dump."

"CD45neg dump"

"CD3pos dump"

"HLA DR hi dump"

"CD56dim"

"CD56 bright"


### Comments

# Neuro

## Neuronal cell types

    [@doi:10.1016/j.cub.2004.06.035]

### Highlights

Identifying the functionally distinct types of neuron is central to any bottom-up understanding of how the brain works.

How are neuronal types distinguished and why do neurobiologists care so much about them?

What do we mean by a cell type? This question has generated much tedious discussion, but the ultimate goal is simple — to find a way to single out a group of neurons that carry out a distinct task.

Increasingly, cell types can be distinguished by their expression of genes and/or proteins. Occasionally they are first distinguished by characteristic patterns of electrical activity. But the commonest way is the shape of the cell

For convenience, neuroanatomists from Cajal’s time to the present have given them evocative nicknames, as shown in Figure 1B, but this is only a mnemonic device.

The names have varying degrees of exactness and currency, ranging from the famously distinctive Purkinje cell to many lesser, poorly defined cells. Like genes, some cells appear under several names.

A particularly unfortunate piece of vagueness pertains to the hierarchy of groups. Terms like ‘variety’, ‘class’, ‘type’, ‘subclass’, and ‘subtype’ are used indiscriminately. The technically correct usage is perhaps for a ‘class’ to represent a collection of ‘types’ that share a common feature. In this usage there is no place for a ‘subclass’—indeed, there is probably a need for more taxonomic levels. The term ‘type’ is sometimes reserved for the terminally differentiated level, and that usage will be followed here.

The term ‘pyramidal cell’ is used for neurons in several brain structures (there are
hippocampal pyramidal cells) and generally denotes a large cell with a roughly triangular soma from which arise distinct sets of apical and basal dendrites.

t is believed that many cell types exist within the large class of neocortical pyramidal cells, but there is at present no powerful and universally agreed way to distinguish them

A mammalian retina contains five major classes of neurons divided into ~60 individual types.

The intrinsic neurons are the horizontal cells (2 types), bipolar cells (~12 types) and amacrine cells (~30 types).

Finally, individual types of retinal neuron exhibit regular spacing, such that neurons of a defined type maintain a minimum distance from other neurons of the same type.

For the first time in any substantially complex CNS structure, the inventory of cell types in the retina appears to be virtually complete.


### Comments

## Cell type nomenclature for the mammalian brain: Development and application of a systematic, extensible convention
    [@url:https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.05406]
    
### Highlights
To facilitate cross-dataset alignment and comparison, we created a working nomenclature convention for matching and tracking cell types across studies.
It augments but does not change existing cell type names provided in original publications and can be directly applied to data from new or published studies.
Finally, we propose conventions for assigning accurate yet flexible cell types names in the mammalian cortex as a step towards a much larger community-wide effort to organize multi-source, data-driven information related to cell types.

These distinct morphological and electrophysiological features have provided the basis for robust and consistent classifications of neuronal cell types.

The use of scRNA-seq, in particular, for cell type classification has increased exponentially since its introduction a decade ago (Tang et al., 2009), with approximately 2,000 published studies using such technology, and several hundred tools for data analysis (Zappia et al., 2018)

Studies combining scRNA-seq with traditional morphological and electrophysiological characterizations have found a more complicated relationship in the brain than in retina, with cell types defined by morphology and electrophysiology sometimes containing cells from several cell types defined using gene expression (Gouwens et al., 2020), and some transcriptomically-defined types containing cells with multiple morphologies (Hodge et al., 2020, 2019).

Within a single study, cell types need to be quantitatively defined, organized, named, and annotated by comparison to published work and cell metadata.

- how do we quantitatively define cell types in an individual study

For essentially all published studies, clusters (or provisional cell types; see below) are defined.

Resulting clusters are often presented as “cell types,” though likely represent a combination of cell types, cell states (such as cell cycle or cell activation) (Kotliar et al., 2019), and the intersection of discrete cell types with more continuous variation.

In some cases, clusters can then be linked with well-established historical types captured in a cell type ontology, or a structured controlled vocabulary for grouping information,

- how do we annotate cell types using experimental and historical context?


- how do we compare and match cell types identified in different studies?

- how should those cell types be named in a way that provides historical or comparative context?

some investigators use generic names like “interneuron 1” or “Ex1” and then use figures, tables, or text to link these clusters to historical cell types.
Others advocate for chaining critical cell type features in the name itself, resulting in names like “Neocortex M1 L6 CT pyramidal, Zfpm2 non-adapt GLU”
Allen Institute assigns semi-automated names that reference marker genes and metadata from a given dataset, such as “Exc L5–L6 THEMIS C1QL3” in human and “L5 IT ALM Pdf5” in mouse cortex, respectively

- what data/metadata infrastructure is required to achieve these goals of cell type classification in a scalable way? 

Any solution devised to tackle this question should ideally be user-friendly, so people will actually use it, and should directly address some of the ongoing challenges of ontology, data matching, and cell type naming described above in its implementation, providing some amount of immediate standardization of any cell type classifications included therein.

To address the latter two challenges and as a practical need to organize vast amounts of multimodal data from the Allen Institute and collaborators, we have developed a nomenclature convention.

At the core of the proposal are two key concepts: a taxonomy (defined above and in Table 1), which must be generated prior to implementation of this schema, and a cell set, which can represent any collection of cells within a specific taxonomy. Provisional cell types (sometimes called cell types for convenience) are particularly important cell sets that represent quantitatively- derived data clusters defined by the classification algorithm that generated the taxonomy.

Analysis of each dataset will create a taxonomy of cell clusters that needs to be tracked.

Each taxonomy is assigned a unique taxonomy id of the format CS[YYMMDD][#], where “CS” stands for cell set; Y, M, and D represent year, month, and day; and # is an index for compiling multiple taxonomies on a single day.

Taxonomies can be defined using a single dataset or through alignment of multiple datasets, and high confidence, high resolution taxonomies can be compiled into a reference taxonomy.

Cell set accession IDs track unique cell sets across the entire universe of taxonomies and are defined as [taxonomy id][unique # within taxonomy].
Cell set labels provide general tags that allow easy tracking of groups of more broadly-defined cell types (e.g., “neuron”) within large taxonomies, and are defined as [Canonical cell type][unique # within canonical cell type].

Cell set aliases include any number of cell set descriptors intended for public consumption, including any cell type names used in manuscripts.

Each cell set can have at most one preferred alias, which is a biologically-driven term that is selected from a controlled vocabulary, and that only can be assigned for cell sets with confident matches across taxonomies

- Provisional cell type: Quantitatively-derived data cluster defined within a tax- onomy. Sometimes called “cell type” here for simplicity
- Cell set accession ID: A unique ID across all tracked datasets and taxonomies. This tag labels the taxonomy and numbers each cell type. [taxonomy id][unique # within taxonomy] -CS1910121201
- Cell set alias: Any cell set descriptor (e.g., what cell types are called in a paper). It can be defined computationally based on the data, or manually based on prior knowledge or new experiments, or a combination of both:
    -ADARB2 (CGE) 
    -Inh L1-2 PAX6 CDH12
    -Chandelier
- Cell set label: An ID unique within a single taxonomy that contains a biological term that ideally is included in a relevant cell ontology. In some cases, it may be redundant with accession ID. [Canonical cell type][unique # within canonical cell type] -Neuron 12 
- Cell set preferred alias:  Analogous to “gene symbol”. At most one biologically- driven name for linking matching cell sets across taxonomies and with a reference taxonomy. 
    -L2/3 IT 4
    -Pvalb 3 
    -Microglia 2


It is necessary for this schema to be easy to understand and applicable to novel and published datasets.

Three examples are presented to illustrate how this nomenclature schema can be applied to published datasets using single nucleus RNA-seq, single cell RNA-seq, and electrophysiology.

As a whole, this workflow provides a general outline for versioned cell type classification that could be specialized as needed for communities studying different organ systems and that provides a starting point for design of future cell taxonomy and nomenclature databases.

In a reference taxonomy, the preferred alias is designed to allow tracking of the same cell types across multiple taxonomies defined using data from multiple modalities. For this reason, it should match (directly map to) cell types defined in the relevant ontology (i.e., Cell Ontology (Diehl et al., 2016) or Neuron Phenotype Ontology (Gillespie et al., 2019)), _at the highest level of resolution possible_.


An attempt has been made to extend the cell ontology to a higher resolution in human MTG with a provisional cell ontology.

The proposed schema can readily represent the matching of Chandelier cells (and other cell types) between the single-species transcriptomics datasets with the integrated transcriptomics reference and can likewise link with taxonomies from other modalities using preferred alias tags.

What should be put in the “preferred alias” identifier of provisional cell types?

Ontology curation would allow users to link data-derived cell sets to common usage terms derived from prior knowledge and that connect directly with the well-annotated ontology tools that are available for many broader cell types (e.g., the Cell Ontology)

a recent paper (Yao et al., 2020b) presents a static browser of more than 370 transcriptomically-defined cell types in mouse hippocampus and cortex, with many of
the features mentioned above, for a single taxonomy: https://taxonomy.shinyapps.io/ctx_hip_browser/.

More ambitious, the Human Cell Atlas (HCA) has proposed a tool to facilitate convergence on common cell type nomenclature through a combination of automated suggestions and other strategies, and that could potentially address some of these use cases directly. This Cell Annotation Platform is a centralized ecosystem for defining cell types and states for the Human Cell Atlas, and beyond, and is available on GitHub (https://github.com/hms-dbmi/cap-example). Whatever strategy is chosen could directly access and improve upon the proposed nomenclature convention


### Comments

## Neuronal diversity: Too many cell types for comfort?
    [@doi:10.1016/s0960-9822(98)70454-3]

    
### Highlights
Results that have recently come out of three laboratories will be seen as bad news by the more parsimonious among us: there are too many different types of neurons in the brain! The lowly retina, that highly specialized and very simple model for more interesting parts of the brain (Figure 1), has at least a dozen distinct types of ganglion cell [1] and more than two dozen types of amacrine cell [2].

Perhaps if we look at a more central brain region, such as the hippocampus, we can find some comfort for the lumpers over the splitters. No such comfort comes out of the recent work of Parra et al. [3], who have examined inhibitory cell types in the CA1 region of the hippocampus. 

If we can accept the tiling principle clearly revealed in the retina, which is certainly a reasonable assumption, then there could be at least as many as 350 types of inhibitory neurons — or 700 types if 20% of all hippocampal neurons are inhibitory — a lot more than the 50 thought to be there by Parra et al. [3].

If we take the number of inhibitory hippocampal neuron types to be about 35, then the redundancy in inhibitory cells would be about 10, so that one could anticipate good continued function with a random loss of 10% or even 20% of the population.


### Comments

## A recipe book for cell types in the human brain
  [@url:https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-019-02343-8]
    
### Highlights

Hodge et al.1 report their analysis of gene expression in single cells from the brain to present a ‘cookbook’ of molecular recipes for the neuronal cell types in the human cerebral cortex
 annotating brain cells under a common taxonomy represents an enormous challenge
bioinformatic analyses to identify molecular signatures of the major cell classes

Many of those clusters represent previously defined cell types, but others revealed previously unknown distinctions within broad neuronal classes.

Each cell type was given a four-part name on the basis of its general function (excitatory, inhibitory or non-neuronal), its anatomical position, and its expression of genes characteristic of major classes and of specific cell types

 A clustering analysis to identify matching cell types. Using this method, the authors determined that almost all of the 75 cell types identified in the human cortex showed correspondence (homology) with cell types described in the mouse.

a clustering analysis to identify matching cell types. Using this method, the authors determined that almost all of the 75 cell types identified in the human cortex showed correspondence (homology) with cell types described in the mouse

### Comments
News and views of "Conserved cell types with divergent features in human versus mouse cortex"

https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-019-1506-7

## Single-cell sequencing paints diverse pictures of the brain
[@url:https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-07027-3]
    
### Highlights
Spanish neuroscientist Santiago Ramón y Cajal created a ‘portrait gallery’ of neurons by carefully examining slices of brain tissue to produce detailed drawings of the cells that captured their diverse shapes. Since then, neurons have been further characterized using measurements of shape, physiology or function. Now, technologies to analyse the gene-expression profile of single cells enable unbiased exploration of cell types.

The authors identified 133 cell types on the basis of gene-expression profiles.

20,000 cells, mostly neurons, from two anatomically distinct cortical areas in adult mice — the visual cortex, which processes visual sensory information from the eye, and the anterior lateral motor cortex, which is involved in movement.

The authors identified more than 100 different cell types, including 61 types of inhibitory neuron and 56 types of excitatory neuron. They found that most cell types were present in both cortical areas — with the exception of excitatory neurons

neurons with different gene-expression profiles also showed different patterns of long-range projection

functional specialization of cortical areas might rely not only on differences in microcircuits and connectivity patterns, but also on the use of different cell types to process information

Economo et al.2 zoom in to look at nuanced differences between neurons in one layer of the cortex.

Economo et al. engineered each subpopulation of neurons to express the protein channelrhodopsin — a light-sensitive ion channel. This enables neuronal activity to be precisely controlled using light (a method known as optogenetics), and so allowed the authors to dissect the roles of the upper and the lower layer-5 neurons in different types of motor function.

 these markers could be used to design more optogenetic experiments that target specific neuronal populations; to investigate whether ‘area-specific’ cell types can be found in other cortical regions;

 
### Comments



# Template 

## Neuron Names: A Gene- and Property-Based Name Format, With Special Reference to Cortical Neurons
[@doi:10.3389/fnana.2019.00025]
### Highlights
Clarity will therefore be enhanced by conveying as much as possible the genes and properties in the neuron name.

Most terms for neurons are holdovers from the nineteenth century, when it was discovered that nerve cells appear as distinct types based on the structure and location of their axons, dendrites and cell bodies.

Betz cell.” All attempts to bring order into this daunting terminological jungle originate in the vast overview contained in Ramón y Cajal’s (1911) great work Histologie du système nerveux de l’homme & des vertébrés.

The SenseLab suite of databases, initiated in 1993 and building
on publications on synaptic organization of local regions, contains NeuronDB, which has focused on the terminology and properties of many of the most highly investigated neurons.

The importance of establishing a common cell type nomenclature across species cannot be overstated .... The nomenclature could follow a hierarchical order, starting at the highest level: the species, then the brain region annotated based on a unified anatomical reference atlas system with cross-correlations among species, and then the cell type as defined by a multimodal feature set (including locational, molecular, morphological, physiological, and ontological features) (ed. italics).... The nomenclature should be a culmination of knowledge gained about the cellular organization of the nervous system.” (Ecker et al., 2017, p. 551)

Any nomenclature format must also take account of the fact that a given property may not always be present. As will be discussed, current research is showing that the properties that define a neuron are dependent on many dynamic factors, reflecting different functional states that can include differences in gene expression.

In general, it may be useful to distinguish three conceptual levels of description: a common term (the label), a definition (a combination of key properties), and additional features (other non-essential properties).

A comprehensive attempt was made by the “Petilla Conference” to list the most common properties used to classify the inhibitory interneurons of the cerebral cortex, all the way to quantitative measurements of cell processes and features (Petilla Interneuron Nomenclature Group [PING] et al., 2008)

This classical unimodal anatomical approach based on structure, however, is not enough in a molecular era.

Each full name technically would begin by indicating the species (and where applicable the strain), gender, and age.

Every neuron name has the flexibility of being augmented (to select subsets) or diminished (selecting supersets) to match the study.

The lumbar ventral horn contains two types of neurons: large cells, motor neurons, which have long axons that innervate the skeletal muscles and muscle spindles, and small cells, which have short axons that stay within the anterior horn (Figure 1).

We will see that morphology and connectivity will vie for priority in defining neurons in many regions; together, they are in fact usually enough to specifically define the cell type.

These many potential types might suggest that we should try to lump as many as possible together to make our database more manageable
 --> I strongly disagree! Let`s embrace large databases. 
 However, a better conclusion is that this approach to neuron terminology is revealing one of the essential features of the neocortex: the uniquely large number of different neuron types, each potentially able to process information in ways that differ either slightly or radically in generating enhanced behavior of the animal.
 --> Now I agree :)

A further problem for the whole idea of specific names for neuron types is the recent study mentioned above ofhippocampal interneurons by Harris et al. (2018), which found continuous variation in classes of properties.

The functional properties of a brain region are state dependent: they vary depending on the behavioral state of the animal.

A nomenclature must regard these added complexities not as problems but as opportunities to reflect the nervous system as it really is.

In conclusion, we summarize the advantages of moving toward a systematic format for neuron names in which traditional names based on structure are extended to include genes and functional properties.

One is by the location of their cell body in one of the different cortical layers, recognizing that a layer may contain different cell types.

Ultimately, a multimodal approach incorporating continuously variable cell types will facilitate an accurate reductionist interpretation of the nervous system.


### Comments

## The BRAIN Initiative Cell Census Consortium: Lessons Learned toward Generating a Comprehensive Brain Cell Atlas
[@doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2017.10.007]
### Highlights
Here we review the experiences of the BRAIN Initiative Cell Census Consortium, ten pilot projects funded by the U.S. BRAIN Initiative
Since the initial discovery of diverse neuronal cell types over a century ago by Ramon y Ca- jal (1899), we have yet to obtain a full description of the different cell types present in the mammalian brain

high-throughput DNA sequencing, allowed the characterization of broad cell clas- ses by brain region, cortical cell layers, or developmental stages

nalysis and cataloging of gene expression patterns of all genes expressed in the CNS by RNA in situ hybrid- ization (Lein et al., 2007) can definebroad classes of cells, but they can neither prospectively predict nor distinguish closely related cells that are defined by the co-expression of subsets of cell- type-specific genes.

However, since a cell’s transcriptome represents just one aspect of its identity, additional work is needed to inte- grate other structural and functional features—distribution, morphology, connectivity, and physiology—in order to devise a principled framework with which to create a taxonomy of cell types in the brain

on June 5, 2014, the BRAIN Initiative working group delivered ‘‘BRAIN 2025: A Scientific Vision,’’ a comprehensive document outlining a bold plan for the U.S. BRAIN Initiative (https://www.braininitiative. nih.gov/pdf/BRAIN2025_508C.pdf). ‘‘BRAIN

7 major goals to be accomplished over a 10-year period, of which the first two were (1) to identify and provide experimental access to different brain cell types to determine their roles in health and disease

in late 2013 the NIH
released a Funding Opportunity Announcement (FOA) entitled ‘‘BRAIN Initiative: Transformative Approaches for Cell-Type Classification in the Brain (U01)’’ (https://grants.nih.gov/grants/ guide/rfa-files/RFA-MH-14-215.html)

these investigations validate the efficacy of single-cell approaches for cataloging cell types, discovering novel subtypes, as well as identifying cell-type-specific marker genes.

A comprehensive adult cell atlas will involve multiple brain re- gions across multiple individuals and will need to consider age, potentially including adolescent, mid-life, and elderly, as an important variable.

A study of hematopoietic differentiation using single-cell ATAC-seq re- vealed that chromatin accessibility at enhancers was more effective at classifying cell types than gene expression profiles (Corces et al., 2016)
--> What does it mean to be more effective?


Sparse labeling of brain cytoarchitecture by the Golgi method transformed neuroanatomy at the turn of the last century (Golgi, 1873; Ramo´ n y Cajal, 1904), enabling detailed visualization of single-cell morphologies across the entire brain. Today, similar sparse visualization of specific cell types in the mouse brain is possible by viral vector-based labeling.

We anticipate that an atlas of cell types in the developing human brain will provide a frame of reference to understand cell vulner- abilities at the earliest stages of diseas.

Comparisons both within and across these groups allow us to identify both universal principles common to multiple cell types (as well as functional units and/or neural circuits) and spe- cific cell types implicated in the etiology of neurologic or psychi- atric diseases.

Toward the ultimate goal of understanding cell types in the human brain, we suggest that cross-species comparison of cell types be conducted across at least three mammalian species: mouse, a non-human primate species, and human. The mouse is the genetically most tractable mammalian experimental model and can serve as the evolutionally more distant outgroup. We recommend the non-human primate be macaque, the most commonly studied non-human primate in neuroscience, and/or marmoset, an emerging non-human primate genetic model sys- tem (Izpisua Belmonte et al., 2015; Miller et al., 2016). A complete inventory of cell types should include information about the defining features, proportions, and spatial distributions of all cell types, and this information must be provided in the context of a framework, including nomenclature, common across species

--> Explicitly suggests we look for archetypes

though we have gained a fairly good understanding of the cell fate specification of major cortical cell classes and a number of transcription factors that regulate these processes (Bandler et al., 2017; Leone et al., 2008; Lodato and Arlotta, 2015; Molyneaux et al., 2007; Nord et al., 2015; Shi- bata et al., 2015), how cells in these major classes complete their terminal mitoses, migrate, and differentiate into the final, adult- stage cell types; to what extent cellular diversity contributes to the complex functions of the brain (Klausberger and Somogyi, 2008); and how those functions in turn rely on the evolutionary and developmental differences underlying cellular diversity are not well understood. To


The importance of establishing a common cell type nomenclature across species cannot be overstated. 

All cell types within each region will likely be arranged in a hierarchical manner as well to reflect their relative closeness to each other. Across species, such hier- archical organization of cell types might be similar overall, but species-specific major or minor branches of cell types will also be recognized. 

he goals of the BICCN are to deliver the following: a deep characterization of the diversity of cell types and the logic of their three-dimensional organization in the brain; an open-access three-dimensional digital reference atlas with molecular, anatomical, and physiological annotations of brain cell types in the mouse
### Comments


# Template 

## Neuronal cell-type classification: challenges, opportunities and the path forward
[@doi:10.1038/nrn.2017.85]
### Highlights
Nonetheless, conceptual difficulties persist. Borrowing from the field of species taxonomy, we propose principles to be followed in the cell-type classification effort, including the incorporation of multiple, quantitative features as criteria, the use of discontinuous variation to define types and the creation of a hierarchical system to represent relationships between cells. We review the progress of classifying cell types in the retina and cerebral cortex and propose a staged approach for moving forward with a systematic cell-type classification in the nervous system

Over the past decade, however, many have come to believe that sys‑ tematic categorization of cell types is an essential prereq‑ uisite for understanding mechanisms, and the descriptive enterprise has been revived.

It is difficult to know how fine and firm the distinctions used to dis‑ tinguish neuronal types from one another should be. It is indisputable that each neuron is different from every other neuron. If we take account of all the differences between neurons, however, the very notion of neuronal types becomes ephemeral. Conversely, although no one would doubt that broad classes of neurons are recog‑ nizable (motor neurons or cortical pyramidal cells, for example), these coarse distinctions are of little value for many experimental purposes. Is there a ‘sweet spot’ somewhere in between?

Purposes of cell-type classification:

- Reproducibility. One important purpose of neuronal classification is to enable the same types of neurons to be studied repeatedly.

Crick, who noted, “It is common for the experimentalist to record that, say, 25% of the neurons studied behave in a particular way, 37% in a different way and a further 15% in a third way. There is no indica‑ tion…what type of neuron they are…. This is not science but rather natural history” (REF. 14).

- Genetic access. Increasingly, one goal of classification is to enable genetic access to specific cell types so that they can be marked and/or manipulated1

- Discovery.As known cell types are catalogued, previ‑ ously unrecognized ones may emerge.

- Studying disease. Some brain diseases primarily affect specific cell types.

- Generating a ‘parts list’. It is therefore fair to say that we have no hope of understanding the brain without an accounting of cell types and their properties.

Another problem is that a unifying definition of neuronal type should involve all three categories of properties, namely, physiological, morphological and molecular, which implies that they co‑vary. Although such a satisfying correspondence has been shown for some types (see below), it seems unlikely that this will always be the case.

Cell non‑autonomy also limits the utility of neuronal connectivity as a criterion: the loss of synaptic inputs or targets can alter a neuron’s place in a circuit without causing any direct change to the neuron itself. Conversely, not all molecular properties are cell autonomous or static.

The problems of defin‑ ing species and neuronal cell types are similar in many ways28–30 , suggesting that there may be lessons to learn from the systematists.

it has been proposed that a cell type should be defined as “a set of cells… that change in evolution together… and are evolutionarily more closely related to each other than to other cells” (REF. 16). In practice, however, there are few cases in which data are available to make this judgement. It may be more realistic to find ways to classify types within a species and then use that classification to launch an evolutionary inquiry.

Perhaps most useful is a third school of systematics,
known as typological, taxonomic or phenetic system‑ atics, which groups individuals into species according to their similarity of genotype and/or phenotype. There are several key principles that this approach advocates, which may provide lessons for cell‑type classifica‑ tion28–30

First, group (that is, ‘type’) membership should be based on multiple criteria rather than on a single so‑called ‘essential’ feature that the investigator favours. Second, the criteria for group membership should be rule‑based, explicit and quantitative. Third, groupings should be hierarchical rather than flat to acknowl‑ edge the validity of both coarse and fine divisions (see below). Fourth, groupings generated by this approach should be viewed as hypotheses to be tested rather than inflexible rules. Finally, classification should focus on discontinuities between groups and ignore parameters that vary continuously within what would otherwise be viewed as a group. Below, we will return to these con‑ cepts after considering the methods available to acquire the needed data.

Classification case studies
- Retina.

Although cell‑type categorization for all retinal neuronal classes is well underway, mouse BCs provide a particularly informative example of cells that have been successfully classified.

Light microscopic validation of the physiologically and molecularly defined types provided strong evidence indicating that all the criteria converged on the same set of types (FIG. 4c).

- Cerebral cortex.

In general, cortical neurons are divided into two
classes, namely, glutamatergic excitatory neurons and GABAergic inhibitory neurons, with multiple ‘subclasses’ within each class.

In the past decade, the generation of many interneuron‑ specific GFP‑ or Cre recombinase‑expressing transgenic mouse lines has dramatically increased our knowledge of the properties,connectivity and function of these interneuron types140 Nonetheless, it is still unclear exactly how many cell
types constitute each inhibitory subclass.

d. Cells intermediate between transcriptomic types136
as well as orthogonality between cell types defined by elec‑ trophysiology and those defined morphologically49
, have
been observed in cortex


Criteria. Taxonomists stress that group membership should be based on multiple criteria rather than a single
‘essential’ feature. A corollary is that groups should not be named for the supposedly essential feature, as this will often end up being misleading. Indeed, there may be no single characteristic that is possessed by every group member. As noted by Tyner, a pioneer in applying insights from systematics to neuroscience, “A biological population can be described in terms of a substantial list of features such that (a) each member of the group pos‑ sesses a large… number of the features; (b) each feature is possessed by a large… number of individuals in the group; and (c) no feature is necessarily possessed by every member of the group” (REF. 30).

--> I slightly disagree with that for the case of cell types.

Use of hierarchical (multi‑ level) rather than flat (single‑level) classification systems has the following two advantages: it includes relationships between types as an intrinsic feature of the classification, and it provides a flexible way to update the system in light of new information.

Continued development of these and other technologies and their unbiased application will enable systematic connectional, physiological and func‑ tional characterization of individual cells. Ultimately, this will be informative and useful not only in refining the cell‑type classification but also in understanding the relationship between a cell’s variable states and its core cell‑type identity

Classification should be based on a hierarchical scheme (as described above) so that additional groupings can be added or interpo‑ lated as new information becomes available

Overall, the enterprise of cell‑type classification has
the potential to transform our view of nervous system function and malfunction. Many problems remain, and, as is the case for species taxonomy, cell‑type classification schemes need to be regarded as hypotheses to be tested and refined as we move through these stages. Nonetheless, the pace of progress is rapid, and some of the conceptual and technical challenges that seem formidable today are likely to be surmounted over the next decade.
### Comments

# Template 

## Title
[@doi:]
### Highlights



### Comments