# Evolutionary perspectives
## How Single-Cell Genomics Is Changing Evolutionary and Developmental Biology
    \cite{marioni2017single
    
### Highlights

In scRNA-seq, information about a cell’s location within the cell type under study is not normally available. 

One challenge in the comparison of cellular transcriptomes between species is to establish the precise orthology and paralogy relationships of all expressed genes at a large scale.

Depicting fate restriction rather than descent, the Waddington epigenetic landscape differs from the kinship lineage, which considers direct, cell to daughter relations. Divisions can occur without restriction of cell fates. cell fate restrictions can occur without division.

Waddington lineages have been  used to redefine the hematopoietic lineage tree. In yolk-rich insects in which the entire cleavage program was replaced by instantaneous cellularization, which challenges the notion of kinship lineage to these animals. 

Evolutionary changes at one cell level  propagate downstream lineage levels. Ex: the evolution of stem cell types appears to be linked to the evolution of the cell types that they produce (Arendt et al. 2016).

Pluripotency TFs known from mammals such as Nanog or Sox2 do not exist in basal metazoans , and there appears to be no conserved set of transcription factors involved in stem cell maintenance. 

From an evolutionary viewpoint, a new cell type identity is established by a novel and unique combination of transcription factors, which are referred to as terminal selectors.

Dopaminergic neurons and the glutamatergic neurons of the subthalamic nucleus (STN) are different, but share similar signatures. Thus, these neurons likely represent sister cell types.

### Comments

One critical challenge in the comparison of cellular transcriptomes between species is to establish the precise orthology and paralogy
--> This limits definitions of cell types for more than one species. 

Disagree with the developmental tree, as it is strictly \textit{not a tree; transdifferentiation exists for example, and there are overlapping types.

Very good article, strong evolutionary perspective.

## The origin and evolution of cell types
    \cite{arendt2016origin
    
### Highlights
Key to cell type identity are evolutionary changes in the ‘core regulatory complex’ (CoRC) of transcription factors, that make emergent sister cell types distinct, enable their independent evolution and regulate cell type-specific traits termed apomeres.

Typically, cellular functions require the cooperation of biomolecules that constitute  cellular modules. Consequently, a cell type has been envisaged as expressing an assemblage of cellular modules that perform discrete subfunctions.

From an evolutionary perspective, similarity may arise for different reasons, not all of which reflect bona-fide cell type homology due to inheritance from a common precursor.

For instance, different cell types can evolve similarity by cell phenotypic convergence. Alternatively, cell types might resemble each other because of concerted evolution, which occurs through mutations affecting genetic information used by multiple cell types.

New cell types have also appeared, or been lost, in many animal clades. 

Cell types must be rebuilt each generation and necessarily share some common developmental history.

Here, we define a cell type as ‘a set of cells in an organism that change in evolution together, partially independent of other cells, and are evolutionarily more closely related to each other than to other cells’.

Cell types are evolutionary units, which implies some genomic information exists is used only by the cells of a given type and not by other cells. 

We therefore propose that the formation of a new cell type identity requires the evolution of a unique cell type regulatory signature that includes a cell type specific core regulatory complex (CoRC).

Set of transcription factors and their cooperative inter actions that first enabled the evolution of independent gene expression, and thereby made the new cell type distinct from its evolutionary sister cell type

Cell type identity is defined by the regulatory mechanisms that enable and maintain the distinct gene expression program of a cell type within the organism. A homologous cell type remains recognizable across species, even when it acquires lineage specific phenotypic differences, owing to strong evolutionary conservation of these regulatory mechanisms.

We refer to the set of transcription factors that control cell type specific gene expression as terminal selectors(as defined by Hobert).

Forced expression of one or a few of these factors is sufficient to alter cell type identity.

The full set of terminal selectors driving differentiation, together with microRNAs
, splicing complexes and any
other regulatory mechanism that establishes and maintains the differential use of genomic information of a cell within the organism, represents the cell type ‘regulatory signature’ (as defined by Arendt) or ‘character identity network’ (as defined by Wagner17).

New cell type specific modules, called apomeres, to the diverging cell type lineages. These become synapomeres if descendant sister cell types undergo additional rounds of evolutionary diversification. 

In summary, the evolution of a new regulatory signature is necessary for establishing a novel cell type, which represents a new, individuated evolutionary unit within the organism.

Relatively few genes may be uniquely expressed in a specific cell type, which has important implications for cell type evolutionary interdependence. Effector genes are often used by different cell types for similar functions.

Module integration. Module integration leads to the emergence of apomeres by combining existing cellular machinery.

The two rounds of genome duplication during vertebrate evolution led to the duplication of almost all subunits in the ancestral pathway. This event facilitated the evolution of distinct rod and cone phototransduction apomeres.

Cell type evolutionary history reflects the diversification of sister cell types through the evolution of new genetic programmes, from the few cell types of metazoan ancestors to the many hundred cell types of most extant bilaterians. The hierarchical trees representing cell type evolutionary and developmental lineage histories may be incongruent.

A disconnect between cell type identity and developmental lineage was first indicated in late nineteenth century embryological experiments conducted by Vincenzo Colucci. In his research, Colucci showed that the lens in the eyes of urodeles (an order of amphibians) could be regenerated from the iris.

How then are we to understand the apparent disconnect between evolutionary and developmental histories? We propose the concept of serial sister cell types as a solution to this conundrum.

We propose that these regionalization events also led to the duplication and subsequent diversification of at least one of the cell types that populated that region.

serial sister cell types arise from different regions and are produced by different stem cells, despite sharing a close evolutionary relationship

Our evolutionary definition of a cell type will facilitate comparative cell biological and organismal research in a broad range of disciplines, from development to physiology or neurobiology, to name but a few.

The recognition that cell type identity and specific function depend on only a small set of genetic information, including CoRCs and apomeres, enables the efficient identification and categorization of cell types across the animal tree.

### Comments
Defines many interesting concepts:

Cellular modules: Protein complexes, pathways and molecular machines that make up cell structure and function.

Cell type homology: Cell types that trace back to the same cell type in a common ancestor.

Cell phenotypic convergence: Cell types that are
phenotypically similar due to independent changes occurring in separate evolutionary lineages.

Concerted evolution: Similar phenotypic changes that occur simultaneously across different cell types of the same species as a result of altering genetic information shared among the cell types.

Sister cell types: Cell types arising by the splitting of an ancestral cell type into two descendant cells via the process of individuation.

Assumes directly, from scratch, that cell types are restricted to single species.

Definition is not rigorously correct: by the first part each organism would have different cell types. And evolution does not apply for organisms! By organism, the intention was likely to be "organisms of the same evolutionary lineage"

By Arendt's definition "specialized Antigen Presenting Cells" is not a cell type.

The recognition that cell type identity and specific function depend on only a small set of genetic information, including CoRCs and apomeres, enables the efficient identification and categorization of cell types across the animal tree. --> I tend to disagre with this sentence.

## The evolution of cell types in animals: emerging principles from molecular studies
    \cite{arendt2008evolution
    
### Highlights

How did the first cell types emerge and become distinct in animal evolution?

Homologous cell types between species (those cells that evolved from the same precursor cell type in the last common ancestor), and of related cell types within a given species, the socalled sister cell types.

Photoreceptors in humans and worms harbour orthologous opsins. Stripes of striated muscle
cells in various animals are composed of the same cytoskeletal proteins, which is indicative of homology.

Molecular fingerprints allows us to
identify homologous cell types over long evolutionary distances and thereby reconstruct systems such as the urbilaterian brain, eyes and immune system. 

homologous cell types conserved over long evolutionary distances tend to exert distinct cellular functions

The precise order of branching in the typogenetic tree may still have to be refined at some positions, although the general degree of relatedness is well documented.

The aim of comparative study of cell type characteristics is to elucidate the evo- lutionary diversification of cell types (cell typogenesis) by detecting the similarities and differences between them.

Comparative genomics recently pinpointed some limitations of the cell type comparative approach revealing that important cell type-specific marker genes are often absent or strongly modified in fast-evolving species

Homologous cell types between species implies that a similar precursor type existed in the last common ancestor of these species

Molecular studies now allow hormone and neuropeptide-secreting cell types of the hypothalamus and pituitary to be tracked from vertebrates to protochordates, annelids and insects

At least one type of blood cell already existed in urbilaterians.

Regarding the vertebrate immune system, a recent microarray survey revealed that many genes
are specifically shared between b- and T-lymphocytes, supporting their status as sister cell types (as compared with other cell types of the vertebrate immune system),

Vertebrate retina harbours two separate sets of sister cell types that have diversified from an ancient rhabdomeric and ciliary photoreceptor precursor type, respectively.

Ancient cell types tend to have multiple functions, as outlined for the presumed macrophage-like haemocytes in the urbilaterian blood that

The vertebrate retina is a valuable case study for the segregation of functions between emerging sister cell types.

Teleost fishes possess more pigment cell types than any other group of vertebrates, indicating a link between cell type divergence and gene duplication.

The principle of cell type functional segregation elegantly explains the evolution of neuronal circuits and could therefore allow us to understand nervous system evolution. If we assume that emergent (functionally segregating) neuron types are likely to move apart from each other according to the specializations they acquire, and if we further assume that, at the same time, these cell types maintain cellular contact for functional coordination, the evolution of axonal and dendritic extensions interconnecting these cells would be triggered

Then the resulting typogenetic tree of homologous cell types is congruent between species, we will be able to infer the evolutionary history of cell type diversification for entire organ systems.

### Comments

"there are hundreds of human cell types"

Concept of a "typo genetic tree".

I like the retina as a model.


## Key transitions during the evolution of animal phototransduction: novelty, "tree-thinking," co-option, and co-duplication.
    \cite{plachetzki2007key
    
### Highlights

"Duplication’’ (either by copying or by fission) happens at other levels of biological organization than gene duplication. Other novel traits originate as new combinations of existing traits, a process sometimes termed bricolage, or tinkering 

In addition to duplication plus divergence, evolutionary novelties often originate as new combinations of existing genes, structures, or species.Whole gene networks are often co-opted to function in new contexts

To what extent do co-duplicated genes respond to natural selection as a unit of interacting proteins rather than as individual genes? 

Rods an cones duplicity theory was first supported by two morphological classes of vertebrate photoreceptor cells

Linear perspective:

One perspective on the origin of rods and cones is that a subset of one cell type gradually transformed into another cell type.

That vertebrate cones are more ancient than rods.

Rods and cones may represent evolutionary duplicates or paralogs. The similarity of expressed protein components of cell types may support duplication of the cell types.

The realization that rod and cone phototransduction pathways represent evolutionary duplicates suggests two areas for future work. 

1 - Was natural selection involved in the differentiation? To what extent does selection act on the entire biochemical pathway as compared to the individual genes? 

2 - A second area for future study is to extend our interpretation to the next level of biological organization above the pathway to the entire cell type.

Animals possess two major classes of photoreceptor cells, ciliary and rhabdomeric. 

The linear explanation for diversity among ciliary photoreceptors is displayed as a carousel of varying photoreceptor morphologies revolving around a central ancestral state, each separated by a single linear transition .

Tree-thinking provides another perspective on animal photoreceptor origins.

Co-option, not co-duplication was responsible for the origins of the interactions between opsins and G-proteins in the first ciliary, rhabdomeric

For instance, can gene duplications provide a selective context for cell type duplications to occur? Can co-option by a given cell type of an alternative signaling or developmental pathway reinforce the evolution of novel tissues, such as vertebrate or molluscan retinas? 

### Comments

Very good case study of cell type divergence. Considers major classes of cell types: rods and cones, using common features for a range of species. Evolutionary toughts are restricted to species-specific cell types

Archetypes. 