# Ontology-related
## Cell type discovery using single-cell transcriptomics: implications for ontological representation
    [@doi:10.1093/hmg/ddy100]
### Highlights

The Cell Ontology (CL) is a biomedical ontology  to provide reference nomenclature for in vivo cell types in humans and major model organisms. However, the advent of high-content single-cell transcriptomics for cell type characterization has resulted in a number of challenges for their representation in the CL.

Propose a strategy for defining cell types within the CL

Initial efforts toward human neuronal cell type discovery focused on identifying broad lineages. Pollen et al. profiled 65 neuronal cells into six categories: neural progenitor cells, radial glia, newborn neurons, inhibitory interneurons and maturing neurons.

Comparing results between these studies has been challenging given the different areas and layers of cortex sampled.

Markers individually are still not specific enough to define discrete cell type classes at the level of granularity revealed by clustering of the sc/snRNAseq data. In fact, there has been surprisingly limited overlap in gene sets specific for individual cell type clusters between studies.

Villani et al. used fluorescence-activated cell sorting and scRNAseq to delineate six different dendritic cell subtypes (DC1–6) and four different monocyte subtypes.

-- A case of deductive reasoning (at least as reported) in assessment of cell type. --

For example, in the two studies focused on the identification of dendritic cell subtypes, it is unclear if the cDC1 and cDC2 subtypes identified by See et al. correspond to the DC1 and DC2 subtypes identified by Villani et al. Indeed, the only way to make this determination would be to perform a de novo comparative analysis of the transcriptional profiles from both studies.

One of the key recommendations was to establish a standard strategy for defining cell type classes that combine three essential components:
• The minimum set of necessary and sufficient marker genes selectively expressed by the cell type
• A parent cell class in the CL
• A specimen source description (anatomic structure þ species).

For one of the inhibitory interneuron cell types defined in this study, we were able to connect the distinct transcriptional profile with a previous cell type defined based on its unique cellular morphology — the Rosehip cell (14).

Colloquial name—rosehip neuron • Alternative name—KIT-expressing MTG cortical layer 1 GABAergic interneuron, human
• Definition—A human MTG cortical layer 1 GABAergic interneuron that selectively expresses KIT, NTNG1 and POU6F2 mRNAs.

--> I like this degree of rigorousness. <--

These informal textual definitions can then be converted into formal ontological definitions, represented in OWL as equivalent classes, using a set of logical axioms that combine assertions about the parent cell class (interneuron), anatomic locations of the neuron cell body (soma), functional capacity of the cell type (gamma-aminobutyric acid secretion) and marker gene expression (expresses some KIT) requirements (Fig. 3).

We are now establishing an extension ontology module containing provisional definitions for novel cell types that we and other research groups will contribute. In this way we will ensure the integrity of the CL reference, while still allowing for the rapid expansion of its content to accommodate cell types defined via these new technologies.

For biomedical ontologies to stay relevant, it will be critical for ontology developers to establish procedures for the processing and incorporation of representations derived from these data-intensive technologies into reference ontologies in a timely fashion. 


### Comments

Nice gathering of articles and conclusions regarding cell types! Tasty!

Number of cell types is way too big for a small group of dedicated curators. 

Also mentions of timely fashion. 

## ontoProc: Ontology interfaces for Bioconductor, with focus on cell type identification
\url{https://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/ontoProc/inst/doc/ontoProc.html
    
### Highlights

The ambitions of collaborative single cell biology will only be achieved through the coordinated efforts of many groups, to help clarify cell types and dynamics in an array of functional and environmental contexts. The use of formal ontology in this pursuit is well-motivated and research progress has already been substantial.

Bakken et al. (2017) discuss  ‘context annotations’ in the form of standardized experiment metadata about the specimen source analyzed and marker genes that serve as the most useful features in machine learning-based cell type classification models.”
Aevermann et al. (2018) describe how the FAIR principles can be implemented using statistical identification of necessary and sufficient conditions for determining cell class membership. They propose that Cell Ontology can be transformed to a broadly usable knowledgebase through the incorporation of accurate marker gene signatures for cell classes.

In this vignette, we review key concepts and tasks required to make progress in the adoption and application of ontological discipline in Bioconductor-oriented data analysis.

The Cell Ontology is a graphical data structure with carefully annotated terms as nodes and conventionally defined semantic relationships among terms serving as edges.
 
Given the wealth of material available in biological ontologies, it is somewhat surprising that formal annotation is so seldom used in practice. Barriers to more common use of ontology in data annotation include: 
(i) Non-existence of exact matching between intended term and terms available in ontologies of interest. 
(ii) The practical problem of decoding ontology identifiers. A GO tag or CL tag is excellent for programming, but it is clumsy to co-locate with the tag the associated natural language term or phrase. 
(iii) Likelihood of disagreement of suitability of terms for conditions observed at the boundaries of knowledge. 

To help cope with the first of these problems, Bioconductor’s ontologyProc package includes a function liberalMap which will search an ontology for terms lexically close to some target term or phrase.

-- still not exact matches -- 

The second problem can be addressed with more elaborate data structures for variable annotation and programming in R, and the third problem will diminish in importance as the value of ontology adoption becomes manifest in more applications.
 
The sym2CellOnto function helps find mention of given gene symbols in properties or parts of cell types.

The task of extending an ontology is partly bureaucratic in nature and depends on a collection of endorsements and updates to centralized information structures.

In order to permit experimentation with interfaces and new content that may be quite speculative, we include an approach to combining new ontology ‘terms’ of structure similar to those endorsed in Cell Ontology, to ontologyIndex-based ontology\_index instances.

Aaron Lun has produced a mapping from informal terms used in the Human Primary Cell Atlas to Cell Ontology tags. We provisionally include a copy of this mapping in ontoProc:

### Comments

Uses pbmc3k dataset as an example. Renders a very cool visualization of the Cell-Ontology relations wrt a dataset. 

Already uses a technotype definition!!! That is amazing. 

## Cells in ExperimentaL Life Sciences (CELLS-2018): capturing the knowledge of normal and diseased cells with ontologies
    \cite{sarntivijai2017cells
    
### Highlights

The Cell Ontology (CL) and Cell Line Ontology (CLO) have long been established as reference ontologies in the OBO framework. We have compiled a series of the challenges and the proposals of solutions in this CELLS (Cells in ExperimentaL Life Sciences) thematic series that cover the grounds of standing issues and the directions, which were discussed in the First International Workshop on CELLS at the the International Conference on Biomedical Ontology (ICBO).

After the discussion, we came to an agreement that both experimental and com- putational scientists in this domain would benefit from a shared consensus cell metadata model which can only be derived by community participation, discussion, and collaboration wherever possible. 

The workshop covered two main areas: (i) the extension of CL and CLO for ontological representation of cell types and cell lines in new technologies and experiments, and (ii) applications and challenges in real-world use cases which may require other ontological adaptations beyond CL and CLO. Examples of biomedical subject matters in the scope of this workshop were: (i) the relationship of cell components to cell types and other biomedical entities and how that may impact health and disease biology (e.g. how the subcellular component composition of certain cancer cell types reflects the prognosis and affects the pro- gression of that cancer), (ii) in vitro - in vivo relationships between primary cell samples and related immortal cell lines, and (iii) modeling of cell responses and fast-growing cell-related data generated by new technologies (e.g. novel cell types identified via interpretation of CyTOF and single cell RNA-Seq data)

New knowledge requires new vo- cabularies, but when do we stop? Or where do we begin? When should new knowledge be qualified for a new term?

When a cell can cleanly be classified with logical axioms such as those shown in the retinal bipolar cells by Osumi-Sutherland et al. (BMC Bioinformatics, this issue), there may exist another case where it may not be as straightforward to do so as shown by Bakken et al. in their attempt to perform high-content classification of brain cells (BMC Bioinformatics, this issue)

Neither the biologist community nor biomedical ontolo- gist community alone can overcome this issue.

Bringing the bench researchers who are experts in laboratory experiments to the first ICBO- CELLS workshop has exposed them to the ontology development and considerations, and at the same time, the ontologists have gained insight to the hands-on activities at the bench

When investigating how to best represent the cell modeling with ontologies, two main solutions were proposed. Should we take the Rector normalization approach [5] in building design patterns for the classification of new cell types with granular details of cell attributes such as those exemplified in bipolar neuronal cells (Osumi-Sutherland, this issue)? Or should we extend the ontology by directly asserting the new classes with axiom declarations to sup- plement the details of the new class attributes when exam- ining cells with detailed surface marker proteins? (Bekken et al., this issue).


As shown in the few scenarios here, it is clear without a doubt that experimental cell standardized nomenclature is a very important driving mechanism to move high- content single-cell research forward.

Probabilities cannot be asserted directly into the ontology, but rather using other modeling techniques such as nanopublications [8] or OBAN [9] to avoid logical errors when reasoning with the ontology.

### Comments

## Cells in ExperimentaL Life Sciences (CELLS- 2018): capturing the knowledge of normal and diseased cells with ontologies
    [@doi:10.1186/s12859-019-2721-9]
    
### Highlights

The 2nd International Workshop on Cells in ExperimentaL Life Science (CELLS-2018) focused on two themes of knowledge representation, for newly-discovered cell types and for cells in disease states.

The general discussion session focused on the ontology design patterns in representing newly-discovered cell types and cells in disease states.

Normalization of experimental cell data produced in different laboratory settings is difficult due to the non-synchronous nature of multiple laboratories working on similar questions on the same timeline

The CELLS-2017 workshop included 7 oral presentations, and eventually five full-length articles [5–9]

The half-day CELLS-2018 workshop included five oral presentations and a general discussion session. Four of the proceedings papers, corresponding to four oral presentations, have been extended, further reviewed, and are published in this special issue for the CELLS-2018 workshop in BMC Bioinformatics.

In this workshop, two new ontologies were reported. Serra et al. presented the development of the Cancer Cell Ontology (CCL) that represents cancer cell types.

The other reported new ontology is the Ontology for Stem Cell Investigations (OSCI) [12]

To support worldwide interoperable cell line infor- mation representation and usage, Pan et al. reported the development of CLO-NICR ontology that represents these cell lines using the semantic framework of CLO.

The CLO-NICR development was one of the research efforts from the OntoChina (http://www.ontochina.org)[15], a new initia- tive supporting an ontology developer community program in China to promote collaborative ontology development and applications around the world
In a CELLS-2018 presentation, Vita et al. applied ontologies to connect cell population descriptions and gating defi- nitions [16]. In their study, ontologies were used to cross-compare cell types and marker patterns in the ImmPort Immunology Database and Analysis Portal [17]. 

Mohamed Keshk of Richard H. Scheuermann’s group presented a provisional cell type ontology that represents newly identi- fied novel cell types experimentally identified using single cell RNA sequencing (scRNAseq), an extension of the work Dr. Scheuermann’s group presented in the CELLS-2017 workshop [5].

For example, what is the difference between normal and diseased cells, and how to onto- logically represent the transformation from a normal cell to diseased cell.

The community discovers new cell types based on subdividing known cell populations with additional markers. As we move beyond marker definition of cell types developed via flow cytometry to defining cell types via single cell RNA sequencing or proteomics, a cell type could potentially be defined by a combinations of hun- dreds of marker genes or proteins. Should

As reflected by the work of Dr. Scheur- mann’s group and others [19], we might therefore con- sider what constitutes the minimal combination set of markers that can uniquely define a new cell type

Given the diver- sity of the experimental approaches for studying cells, we need to be careful in how we represent experimental results in the form of ontological definitions of cell types

A variety of recent studies have discovered many new cell types, which sometimes show different characteristics in normal or disease states [22–26].

We anticipate promising research progress in the cell-related ontology field in the years to come.


### Comments


## Reporting and connecting cell type names and gating definitions through ontologies
    [@doi:10.1186/s12859-019-2725-5]
    
### Highlights
Human immunology studies often rely on the isolation and quantification of cell populations from an input sample based on flow cytometry and related techniques. Such techniques classify cells into populations based on the detection of a pattern of markers. The description of the cell populations targeted in such experiments typically have two complementary components: the description of the cell type targeted (e.g. ‘T cells’), and the description of the marker pattern utilized (e.g. CD14−,CD3+).

We here describe our attempts to use ontologies to cross-compare cell types and marker patterns (also referred to as gating definitions). 

We used a large set of such gating definitions and corresponding cell types submitted by different investigators into ImmPort, a central database for immunology studies, to examine the ability to parse gating definitions using terms from the Protein Ontology (PRO) and cell type descriptions, using the Cell Ontology (CL). We then used logical axioms from CL to detect discrepancies between the two.

We also suggest a number of new terms to describe gating definitions in flow cytometry that are not based on molecular markers captured in PRO, but on forward- and side-scatter of light during data acquisition, which is more appropriate to capture in the Ontology for Biomedical Investigations (OBI). Finally, our approach results in suggestions on what logical axioms and new cell types could be considered for addition to the Cell Ontology.

An initial examination of the data submitted to Imm-
Port revealed that, in the absence of precise standards.

We describe here our attempts to standardize the “cell population” field, by mapping it to terms in the Cell Ontology

As a result of this work, we propose a new convention on how these two fields should be populated that allows one to in- terpret them computationally, query across them, and to utilize logical axioms in the Cell Ontology to check for consistency between them.

“singlet/ CD14−/CD3+” is a gating definition from a center using slashes as separators which consists of three gates: “sing- let”, “CD14−”, and “CD3+”. 

Our purposes to recognize PRO as the central arbiter and translator of protein names.

While the synonyms in Table 1 were considered not problematic, we also found a number of labels that could not be mapped precisely to individual proteins in PRO. A common case were protein complexes: Investigators often refer to “CD8”, which is a complex of a CD8 alpha

Ideally, all of these protein complexes would be included in PRO. This work should be co- ordinated with the Cell Ontology, to ensure it matches the logical cell type definitions.

The use of cocktails of markers to include or exclude lineages of cells (e.g. ‘Lin-’) is hard to represent as different cocktails exist.

Several gating definitions we encountered for flow cy- tometry data do not refer to a specific marker, but ra- ther utilize forward- and side-scatter of detector light to provide size estimates of the object passing by the detector.

Such definitions of cell types based on their characteristics in a flow cytometer are best captured in the Ontology of Biomedical Investiga- tions (OBI) [9], and we are in the process of submitting them there.

The guide- line to use CL terms for submission of cell populations to ImmPort was found to be insufficient, as most cell populations gated for are further subsets or activation states of CL types


Thus, we revised our approach and developed a future tentative guideline whereby the data provider specifies the parent cell type in CL and adds additional markers or cell subtypes after an ‘&’ symbol. For example, “BDCA3\_pmDC” was parsed to ‘plasmacy- toid dendritic cell’ & “BDCA3+”.

In order to detect such discrepancies, we implemented
a prototype validator, shown in Fig. 1, which can be accessed through https://github.com/jamesaoverton/cell- name-and-marker-validator. The proposed workflow is that users would input “Population name” and “Gating definitions” fields and the validator will check both for
validity and cross-check for consistency

We then wrote a second Python program to demonstrate our vi- sion of the standard terminology going forward as an interactive web page. This tool reads labels and logical definitions from the Cell Ontology, PRO short labels from the Protein Ontology, and our manual list of gate names. The user is asked to enter a cell population name from the Cell Ontology and a set of gates. The tool then displays the logical definition for the cell type and the gating strategy, and highlights any conflicts between the two.

Here we demonstrated that a vast number of gating defi- nitions, but not cell population names, could be mapped to terms in ontologies, allowing us to semantically ex- press them and detect potential clashes.

Some gate names occurred nearly 2000 times, while others only occurred once

The relationships between “Population name” and “Gating definition” are not abso-
lute, for example if the input sample type is PBMC ver- sus splenocytes (“Population name”) with the same sorting definition (“Gating definition”) the outcome will be different cell types. This means that the validation cannot be expected to catch every potential error and fu- ture refinement may be possible after larger datasets are generated using these criteria. We also recognize that our approach is human-centric due

Lastly, and signifi- cantly, implementation of this validation into the Imm- Port submission templates is required if it is to be practical and easy for the HIPC community to utilize.
Abbreviations

Table 2: 
Markers that could not be precisely mapped to individual PRO protein chains

### Comments

Seems that they a aim at a very advanced very level of usage before we lay a bit more of the foundations. 

Manual curation will not happen for all proteins of all organisms. 

https://github.com/jamesaoverton/experimental-cell-ontology


## An ontology for cell types
[@doi:10.1186/gb-2005-6-2-r21]

### Highlights
the annotation of  phenotypes is hampered by a lack of structured information describing a variety of other biological objects, including cell types.

To address these needs, we have developed an ontology that describes the cell types of the major model organisms, both animal and plant.

Its use will allow a biologist to query a sin- gle database with such questions as: list all of the cell types in
mouse that express the Notch gene and all of the cell types in Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans that express the closest homolog of this gene.

The first design decision was whether we should attempt to integrate cell types from all phyla within a single ontology or build independent ontologies for different taxonomic groups.

Despite these problems in building an 'integrated' cell-type ontology, the advantages, were we to succeed, outweigh them, and we have therefore taken this approach to develop a single ontology that inte- grates cell types from different phyla.

ontology appears as a complex hierarchy (technically known as a directed acyclic graph, or DAG) where a given term (or concept) may not only have several children, but also several parents. The parent and child terms are connected to each other by is_a and develops_from relationships.

it is far from obvious that vertebrate and inverte- brate pigment cells are homologous and these concepts are therefore described as pigment_cell_(sensu_Vertebrata) and pigment_cell_(sensu_Nematoda_and_Protostoma, respectively.

The two top-level nodes of the Cell Ontology are cell_in_vivo and experimentally_modified_cell.

The organism-independent classification of cells follows several different criteria that include: 'function' (for example, electrically_excitable_cell, secretory_cell, photosynthetic_cell), histology (for example, epthelial_cell, mesenchyme_cell), lineage (for example, ectodermal_cell, endodermal_cell) and ploidy (for example, haploid_cell, polyploid_cell).

Kupffer cells are specialized vertebrate macro- phages of the reticuloendothelial system. They function to fil- ter small foreign particles (including bacteria) and old reticulocytes from the blood. In the Cell Ontology they are to be found by their function (they are a type of defensive_cell), by their lineage (they are derived from a mesodermal_cell derived from a hematopoietic_stem_cell, itself a type of stem_cell), by their morphology (they are a type of circulating_cell) and by their organism (they are a type of animal_cell).


It is designed to be useful in the sense that a researcher should be able to find, in a rapid and intuitive way, any cell type in any of the major model organisms and, having found it, learn a considerable amount about that cell type and its relationships to other biological objects.

Cell-type unique identifiers (ID) that can be incorporated into any database holding cell-type-associated knowledge.

While we expect such bio- informatics applications to be its immediate use, we hope that, in the longer term, all biologists will find the ontology useful

Cells are the biological units with which tissues and organs and organ systems are built. A rich and explicit description of cell types across phyla that are adapted by bio- logical databases will help facilitate this transition.

These cell types have been collated from our own knowledge, from major textbooks (for example [20-22])

20. Williams PL, (Ed): Gray's Anatomy 38th edition. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 1996.
21. Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K, Walter P: The Molec- ular Biology of the Cell 4th edition. New York: Garland; 2002.
22. Esau K: The Anatomy of Seed Plants 2nd edition. New York: John Wiley; 1977

### Comments

The architecture of CL has changed over time. 

The CL had originally a _learning_ goal (among others) : "learn a considerable amount" . This explains a "bias" towards didatic definitions of cell types. 

## Logical Development of the Cell Ontology
[@doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-6]

### Highlights
Here we report onthe generation of computable definitions for the hematopoietic cell types in the CL.

Computable definitions for over 340 CL classes have been created using a genus-differentia approach

The implementation of this process exposed areas in the ontology where new cell type classes were needed to accommodate species-specific expression of cellular markers.


Use of computable definitions enhances the development of the CL and supports the interoperability of OBO ontologies.

First developed in 2004 [3], the CL is composed of
about 1000 classes connected via is_a and develops_from relationships.


The initial classification was done manually and not in accordance with commonly accepted ontology engineering princi- ples such as normalization and modularity [4]. The resulting ontology contained numerous mistakes and omissions, and proved difficult to maintain and extend.

computable definitions (sometimes called “logical definitions” or “cross-products”) are treated as equivalence relationships between the defined class and
some conjunction of classes. For example, the class “nucleate erythrocyte” can be defined as equivalent to the class of things that are both erythrocytes and that
have a nucleus as a part.


Our computable defini- tions all follow a genus-differentia structure, in which a class is defined by refining an existing more general class (the genus - in the above example this would be “erythrocyte”) and one or more differentiating character- istics (the differentiae - in the above example this is the has_part relationship to nucleus).

They defined dendritic cell types using cell surface expression of proteins as a major axis of dif- ferentia. Thus, a “CD8_alpha-negative, CD11b-negative dendritic cell” is a “conventional dendritic cell” (the genus) that “lacks_plasma_membrane_part CD8_alpha.


By integrating Masci et al.’s approach with our recent reorganization of the hematopoietic branch of the CL
[13], we have created a new sub-ontology called “Hemo_CL

By having computable definitions for the vast majority of classes, new relationships can be inferred between classes by the use of automated reasoners.

278 cell type classes defined according to this template have been generated, reflecting the common use of flow cytometry to distinguish hematopoietic cells based on cell surface markers.

Some of our definitions also made use of negative criteria - for example, an alveolar macrophage is partially defined as a tissue-resident macrophage that lacks che- mokine receptor CX3CR1 on its plasma membrane

Pro-B cells, for example, are described as being in the “early stages of recombination of B cell receptor genes”,soa computable definition using “participates_in immuno- globulin V(D)J recombination (GO:0033152)” is appro- priate.

the only similarity in cell surface markers between mouse and human HSC is that neither express cell surface pro- teins associated with fully differentiated immune cells (CD3epsilon, CD19, etc), a characteristic researchers call lineage-negative (lin-). Human HSC express CD34 and lack expression of CD38 on their cell surface whereas mouse HSC express other proteins, Kit and Spa-1, on their cell surface.

New cell types have been added to represent hemato- poietic progenitor cell types that are currently an intense focus of research

The transitive nature of the develops_from relationship allowed the reasoner to infer develops_from relationships between classes that are separated by multiple levels in the asserted is_a hierarchy

Errors that contradict biological knowledge were checked by using disjointness constraints.

Computable definitions can reveal ambiguities in how a cell type is defined by a curator. One example is the cell types “natural T regulatory cell” (nTregs) and “induced regulatory cell” (iTregs). Because the cell types have the same is_a parent and share two cell surface markers, the reasoner inferred the former to be a subtype of the latter in an earlier version of the ontology, violating a disjointness constraint existing between the two classes.

Some ambiguities resulted from how a cell type is defined in the scientific literature. The automated rea- soning for the “mature NKTcell” provided an interest- ing example. Reasoning over the ontology failed to infer an is_a relationship between “NK T cell” and the “natural killer cell” despite “NK T cell” having the synonym “natural killer T cell” (not shown). Investigation of the literature revealed that the name “natural killer T cell” is controversial; the origin of the name “NK T” cell refers to cell surface expression of the NK1.1 protein and was not intended to imply a direct link to natural killer cells [21]. However some researchers feel there is enough functional overlap between “NK-” and “NK T-” cell types to justify the “natural killer T cell” moniker [21]. In Hemo_CL, the synonym is left in place as it reflects common usage, but NK T cell types and natural killer cell types are kept in separate branches of the ontology as inferred by the reasoner.


Computable definitions for hematopoietic cell types have importance beyond ontology maintenance and integration for the wider scientific community. 

We believe hypothesis- generation represents a future use of well-structured biomedical ontologies that have computable definitions.


We generated new hematopoietic cell types to repre- sent entities described in current research and added computable definitions for all hematopoietic cell types using classes from other OBO library ontologies.

(note that this ontology has been integrated into the
main CL ontology, but a record of the Hemo_CL subset as described in this paper will remain in the source con- trol system. The revision number described in this paper is hemo_CL.obo revision 1.47).



### Comments

A "rigorous definition" is somewhat a looser version of a "computable definition".  


## An improved ontological representation of dendritic cells as a paradigm for all cell types
[@doi:10.1186/1471-2105-10-70]

### Highlights

Currently, the CL employs multiple is_a relations, defining cell types in terms of histological, functional, and lineage properties, and the majority of definitions are written with sufficient generality to hold across multiple species. This approach limits the CL's utility for computation and for cross-species data integration.

DC-CL subtypes are delineated on the basis of surface protein expression, systematically including both species-general and species-specific types and optimizing DC-CL for the analysis of flow cytometry data.

To help meet the data annotation needs of model organ- ism researchers, Bard and colleagues developed an ontol- ogy of cell types [14] that has been widely used for the annotation of data in genome and other biological data- bases, including biorepository data. To enhance the CL's utility for computational analyses, we developed a sys- tematic approach for the ontological representation of cells as described below, adhering to the principles out- lined in [13]

The Cell Ontology (CL) currently contains representa- tions of some 863 cell types

Each cell type within the CL is related to at least one super- type via the is_a (subtype) relation, but most CL cell types have multiple supertypes, and are thus classified on mul- tiple axes, a phenonmenon referred to as 'is_a overload- ing' [15]

To enhance the CL's utility for computational analyses, we developed a systematic approach for the ontological rep- resentation of cells that

-  separates classification via the is_a relation from the assertion of structural, functional, and lineage properties by using formally defined, property-specific relations, such as has_function
- systematically includes both species-neutral and spe- cies-specific representations of cell types
- defines cell types on the basis of specific combinations of surface proteins used for identification of the cells via flow cytometry


We have applied our method to develop an extension of the CL, DC-CL, for dendritic cells (DC), focusing on the DC types observed in mice and humans and optimizes it for the analysis of flow cytometry data. 

In the immunological literature and research community, the term 'dendritic cell' does not refer to a single, clearly distinguishable cell type; rather it refers to cells from a variety of sub-populations that have different morpholo- gies, are distributed across different microenvironments within the body, express different microbial receptors and surface molecules, and different cytokines.

We chose DCs as our case study in order to standardize the current terminology and definitions for DC subtypes and provide a common point of reference from which to maintain a common representation of DCs as knowledge about their subtypes evolves.

To develop a general method for the ontological represen- tation of cell types, we first identified five families of cel- lular properties that can hold for a given cell type across the various microenvironments in which the cell type can be found. We identified the following five such families of properties:

i) structural components, such as granules in the cytoplasm or molecules on the cell surface

ii) functions cells of the given type perform

iii) dispositions, such as the tendency to participate in certain types of processes

iv) anatomical locations in which the cells are found and

v) lineage relationships.

More precisely, we classify DCs by surface protein expression

In addition, in constructing DC-CL we employed accepted principles of ontology development outlined by the OBO Foundry [13], including the use of genus-differentia definitions [21].

Types are general; they are the kinds of things that exist and are documented in scientific text- books (e.g. human, red blood cell); instances are particu- lar; they are the specific examples upon which experiments are performed (e.g. J. Craig Venter, the many red blood cells in my body)

Cell types in DC-CL are defined in terms of the proteins and protein complexes expressed on the cell surfaces of the corresponding instances, consistent with the characterization of DC populations using surface protein expression.

The definitions of such types thus involve terms representing proteins in the Protein Ontology (PRO) [24] and protein complexes in the Gene Ontology Cellular Component Ontology (GO CC) [25]. The reference to proteins and protein complexes enables us to assert the specific presence or absence of defining molecules on cells of a given type.

CD11c- plasmacytoid dendritic cell is_a leukocyteCL that 
has_plasma_membrane_part CD45RAPRO and 
has_plasma_membrane_part CD123PRO and 
has_plasma_membrane_part CD303PRO and 
has_plasma_membrane_part ILT7PRO and 
lacks_plasma_membrane_part CD11cPRO and 
lacks_plasma_membrane_part CD3PRO and 
lacks_plasma_membrane_part CD19PRO and
lacks_plasma_membrane_part CD34PRO and 
lacks_plasma_membrane_part CD56PRO

For example, two defined classes of plasmacytoid DCs might be distinguished, those that do and those that do not express CCR7 on their respective membranes.

For example, CD11clow plasmacytoid DCs express low levels of CD11c relative to leukocytes and are defined this way in DC-CL.

Such assertions are needed for example to distinguish conventional DCs (CD11c high), CD11c low plasmacytoid DCs, and CD11c negative plasmatcytoid DCs.


To define these relations, we first define the functional operators geometric_mean_of and number_of. The first is defined in the usual way, as a function from a set of num- bers to their geometric mean [29]. number_of(x, Y, R, t) is defined as the number of instances of type Y that are related to x, an instance of X, by the relation R at time t. Thus for example where R is the relation has_ part, this results in

To best facilitate cross-species data interoperability, ontol- ogies need to provide both species-neutral and species- specific terms. Species-neutral terms allow for commonal- ities between species to be identified

Cells that are CD11c+ and CD19- CD3- C34- CD56- are referred to as conventional dendritic cells in both mice and humans, and instances of such cells in mice and in humans are instances of the DC-CL type conventional dendritic cell.

PRO is species-neutral in the sense that, pro- teins from different species that are the products of orthol- ogous genes are instances of the same PRO gene product level type, and proteins from different species represent- ing equivalent forms (e.g. CD45RA in human and mouse) are instances of the same sequence variant level or protein isoform level types

To avoid the unnecessary creation of overly specific sub- types, we define cell types in terms of PRO gene product level types, and recommend that PRO types at this level be used wherever possible.

Terms for 29 DC types are defined in DC-CL, along with 12 precursor cell types, which are defined in order to assert lineage relationships. All DC types are subtypes of conventional dendritic cell, CD11clow plasmacytoid dendritic cell, or CD11c- plasmacytoid dendritic cell (Table 1).

Table 1: The genus-differentia form of the definitions for the three most general types in DC-CL


In addition to defining the DC types by the presence or absence of specific surface proteins, we include assertions about which of the Toll-like receptors (TLR) are expressed on each DC type. Future work on DC-CL will include incorporation of assertions about other molecules impor- tant to immune function, such as additional pattern rec- ognition receptors and cytokine receptors.

DCs have a particularly complicated biology [16-18]; thus not only are efforts to develop standardized, comprehensive information resources needed, but DCs are a good model for testing a method for representing cells in an ontology.

The inclusion of species-specific cell types allows for the more specific annotation of data and for the incorpora- tion within DC-CL of species-specific properties, many of which have important functional consequences

To define cell types on the basis of species of origin, or to include assertions that hold for the type in one species but not another, we recommend the creation of species-spe- cific extensions rather than the inclusion of such types in CL or DC-CL. This approach allows for the representation of detailed, species-specific information without using multiple modes of classification (structure and species of origin) or including conflicting assertions in the core ontology. 

Such statistical methods can be applied to the analysis of individual flow data sets, while ontology defi- nitions need to hold universally, across different experi-
mental designs, protocols, and equipment and across differences in the resulting distributions of fluorescence intensities for reference cells. Indeed, the ontology defini- tions should hold across different assays for surface pro- tein expression, and should not be tied directly to flow cytometry. We have therefore taken a relatively simple approach to the formulation of cell definitions that hold universally and that are supported by our current under- standing of DC biology. It is our hope, however, that our work, taken together with [40], will encourage the use of more objective criteria in the analysis of flow cytometry data and in the description and analysis of cell types in general.

Their development within the framework of a common top- level ontology (Basic Formal Ontology, BFO, [42]) and consistent employment of a common set of relations allows Foundry ontologies to be used together as modules of a larger system.

DC-CL provides a prospectively highly valuable resource for the study of DCs. It further offers a generalizable method for the ontological representation of cells that offers significant benefits in the form of increasing the amount and accuracy of information contained in the ontology, enhancing support of the ontology for compu- tation, and providing a much needed resource to support analysis of high-throughput, multidimensional flow data. Thus, we propose the method used to create DC-CL as a strategy for the representation of all cells of hematopoietic lineage

### Comments

Utility maximized for computational analysis --> There might be atrade off with real research setttings.

species neutral representation!! this is very imaginative. 

The definitions they raise are artificial: in practice, the concepts used are different. 



## Hematopoietic Cell Types: Prototype for a Revised Cell Ontology
[@doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2010.01.006]

### Highlights
Alexander D. Diehl1,‡, Alison Deckhut Augustine2, Judith A. Blake1, Lindsay G. Cowell3, Elizabeth S. Gold4, Timothy A. Gondré-Lewis2, Anna Maria Masci3, Terrence F. Meehan1, Penelope A. Morel5, Anastasia Nijnik6, Bjoern Peters7, Bali Pulendran8, Richard H. Scheuermann9, Q. Alison Yao2, Martin S. Zand10, and Christopher J. Mungall

The Cell Ontology (CL) aims for the representation of in vivo and in vitro cell types from all of biology.

We have now addressed the specific content of one area of the CL, the section of the ontology dealing with hematopoietic cells

Within the Mouse Genome Informatics resource (www.informatics.jax.org), for instance, the CL is used in conjunction with Gene Ontology (GO) during annotation of mouse gene products to indicate the cell type in which a gene product is active.

The high level terms themselves do not represent actual cell types, so the ontology is not a true is_a hierarchy. This unwieldy ontological construct is not ideal for developing proper inference about cell types, nor does it always provide obvious placement of new cell type terms.

NIAID) sponsored “Workshop on Immune Cell Representation in the Cell Ontology,” held in May 2008

we have focused on structural criteria where possible as the primary differentia, but have utilized other types of differentia when necessary. This flexibility is required to adhere to the commonly accepted biological definitions of individual cell types.

In the first stage, which is now complete, we revised current terms and added new terms so that all hematopoietic cell type terms now have textual definitions that contain all the necessary details to define the cells logically.

In restructuring the ontology for the hematopoietic cells, we have eliminated the multiple inheritance via the artifactual high-level terms such as “cell by histology.” “cell by nuclear number,” or “cell by function.”

In general the hematopoietic terms are presented as species neutral, but species-specific information is incorporated in some definitions where necessary and comments have been added to provide clarity to data annotators, especially in cases where certain cell types have no close homologue in another species.

The work described herein represents a significant advance in the representation of hematopoietic cell types in the Cell Ontology, and will increase the utility of the ontology for data annotation, integration, and analysis in this domain in both research and clinical settings.



### Comments




## Usage of cell nomenclature in biomedical literature
[@doi:10.1186/s12859-017-1978-0]

### Highlights
Cell lines and cell types are extensively studied in biomedical research yielding to a significant amount of publications each year. Identifying cell lines and cell types precisely in publications is crucial for science reproducibility and knowledge integration.

In this study, we analyse the usage of cell nomenclature, both in Vivo, and in Vitro in biomedical literature by using text mining methods and present our results.

Our aims are to understand how the nomenclature related to cell types and cell lines is used in literature, how both evolved over time, and how this information may allow us to provide better tools and resources for biomedical researchers. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study with this focus, while several previous studies focused on identify- ing the cell type and cell line names in text [5, 6].


The cell type dictionary is generated from the labels and syno- nyms used in the CL, obtained from the CL’sOWL ver- sion available at http://purl.obofoundry.org/obo/cl.owl.

The final cell type dictionary consists of 3838 term referring to 2180 distinct cell types.

We used the Whatizit [9] entity recognition pipeline to annotate cell type and cell line names. The taggers of Whatizit anno- tate documents in a dictionary-based approach.

False nega- tives are mainly due to the cell types which are not yet covered by CL such as cells tagged with cell surface markers, e.g., ‘CD58-positive natural killer cell’, and absent synonyms (e.g. ‘neuronal cell’ is not a synonym for ‘neuron’ in CL, although it is listed as synonym by alternative resources such as CellFinder [12].

Using our text mining approach, we were able to identify 1277 of 2180 (59%) cell types and 4907 of 38,605 (13%) cell lines in the open access full text articles.

Both cell line as well as cell type nomenclature suffers from a lack of authority in naming convention unlike other biological entities that have well-established con- sortium such as HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee (HGNC) for gene names [13].

Our results will be of most interest to researchers in biomedical text mining. We generated a novel corpus annotated with mentions of cell types and cell lines, which can be used for developing and evaluating text mining methods.


### Comments





## Cell ontology in an age of data-driven cell classification
[@doi:10.1186/s12859-017-1980-6]

### Highlights

Data-driven cell classification is becoming common and is now being implemented on a massive scale by projects such as the Human Cell Atlas?
 How will data from the various types of single cell analysis be made cross-searchable?


Focusing on examples from the mouse retina and Drosophila olfactory system, I present worked examples illustrating how formalization of cell ontologies can enhance querying of data-driven cell-classifications and how ontologies can be extended by integrating the outputs of data-driven cell classifications


Data driven classification of cell types via unsupervised or semi-supervised clustering is becoming common


NBLAST is already in use as a query tool allowing users to use a suitably- prepared neuron image to query for neurons with simi- lar morphology, with results ranked, as for BLAST, using a similarity score.

this work faces a problem, especially when carried
out on a scale as large as the Human Cell Atlas. How can the results be made searchable and accessible to bi-
ologists in general? How can they be related back to the rich classical knowledge of cell-types, anatomy and development?


It is, of course, not always clear precisely what known cell type, if any, corresponds to a single cell whose image or transcriptome we have or corresponds to a cluster of simi- lar cells predicted by unsupervised clustering. In this case, ontologies can be a source of more general cell classifica- tions that may applicable (lymphocyte; cortical interneuron; epithelial cell).

In as far as these ontologies accurately record nomen- clature, classification and part relationships to anatomy they are ideally suited to provide a mechanism for anno- tation of single-cell experiments. But cell ontologies will only be able to play this role if they are sufficiently accurate, flexible and scalable enough to keep up with the flood of new data.

A single neuron may be classified by structure (pseudo-bipolar), electrophysi- ology (spiking), neurotransmitter (glutamatergic), sen- sory modality (secondary olfactory neuron), location(s) within the brain (antennal lobe projection neuron, mushroom body extrinsic neuron), etc. But manually maintaining these multiple axes of classification simply doesn’t scale: adding new terms requires (human) edi- tors to know all of the appropriate classifications to add and how to rearrange existing classifications to fit the new term. It also requires them to understand the intent behind existing manually asserted classifications, which is typically partially documented at best.

_Mismatch between quantified logic, which records assertions about all members of a class, and the messy, noisy reality of biology and the data we collect about it._

Here I present two case studies of how formalizing cell ontologies and using them to annotate the results of single cells analysis can improve the searchability and query-ability of the single cell data. In both cases I explore how we might use the outputs of single-cell analysis to extend cell ontologies and link them to data that can be used for data-driven queries for cell types.

A complete connectome for a single region of the mouse retina provides connectomic profiles and circuit context for over 400 RBCs [7]. A classification derived from unsupervised clustering of 25,000 single mouse RPC transcriptomes by Shekhar and colleagues [1] found 15 cell types distinguishable by transcriptome.

Classification of retinal bipolar cells in the cell ontology. Note that general types (rod, cone, ON, OFF) are non-species specific, whereas specific types are specified for mouse. This is necessary because morphologically defined classes vary between species.

Where multiple markers of a cell types are identified multiple equivalence-axioms could be added. This process of generating equivalence axioms could po- tentially be automated using mappings of cell ontology terms to data-derived clusters.

The examples given here are well axiomatised, but the degree of effort put in to axiomatising will, of course, de- pend on use cases and resources in individual projects

The combination of equiva- lence and subclassing (restriction) axioms generates hidden General Class Inclusion axioms – logically associating sets of properties with each other in a way that can be hard to keep track of.


Thomas Gruber’s ‘principle of minimal commitment’
[26] is particularly relevant to this discussion. This principle suggests that:
“An ontology should require the minimal ontological commitment sufficient to support the intended knowledge sharing activities. A shared ontology need only describe a vocabulary for talking about a domain whereas a knowledge base may include the knowledge needed to solve a problem or answer arbitrary queries about a domain.”

Where more precise annotation of cell-type is possible, linking cell-types to data that can be used in data-driven queries can help users find potential matches and is potentially a source of automated annotation.

Formalization is needed to support multiple inheritance classification querying and automated classification of individuals from annotation. Successful formalization re- quires the development of clear, well documented design patterns in which equivalent class axioms are kept minimal – with clear aims in mind for use.


### Comments

"The combination of equiva- lence and subclassing (restriction) axioms generates hidden General Class Inclusion axioms – logically associating sets of properties with each other in a way that can be hard to keep track of"

--> Solution: bottom up classification starting with the most specific. 


# Template 

## Formalization of taxon-based constraints to detect inconsistencies in annotation and ontology development
[@doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-530]
### Highlights
Although the ontologies are intentionally developed to be taxon neutral, and to cover all species, there are inherent taxon
specificities in some branches. For example, the process ‘lactation’ is specific to mammals and the location ‘mitochondrion’ is specific to eukaryotes. The lack of an explicit formalization of these constraints can lead to errors and inconsistencies in automated and manual annotation.

Detection of inconsistencies in taxon-specificity enables gradual improvement of the ontologies, the annotations, and the formalized constraints. This is progressively improving the quality of our data.

A number of different automated prediction methods are applied by members of the GO Consortium. These methods include transfer of manual GO annotations to closely related orthologs

Sixteen evidence codes are used to describe manual GO annotation efforts, and one code, ‘IEA’ (Inferred from Electronic Annotation), describes all automatically-predicted GO annotations

The class ‘lactation’; GO:0007595 is defined as ‘The secretion of milk by the mammary gland.’ rather than ‘The secretion of milk by the mammary gland in mammals.’. In classes such as this, however, there is obvious implicit taxon specificity.

Where a GO class X has the only_in_taxon relationship to a taxonomic group Y, this indicates that that GO class and its sub-types and parts should only be used for annotation of gene products from organisms of that taxonomic group and its sub-types.

The constraint is inherited by sub- types and parts of the GO class, and it can be seen in Figure 1 that ‘lactation’ inherits this constraint from the GO class ‘mammary gland development’.

Where a GO class X has the never_in_taxon relationship to a given taxonomic group, this indicates that that GO class and its sub-types and parts should never be used for annotation of gene products from organisms of that taxonomic group or its subtypes

The never_in_taxon relationship is particularly useful in cases where gene products of some taxa are known to be inappropriate for annotation to a given GO class, but where we do not yet have enough information to make an only_in_taxon. 

Taxon classes are drawn from the NCBI taxonomy hierarchy and supplemented with union classes created for use in-house. For example, to capture the set of organisms carrying out photosynthesis in any form we have created the union class ‘Bacteria or Archaea or Viridiplantae or Euglenozoa’ (Figure 2)

In developing the taxon constraints there is always the concern of over- or under-constraint. If the constraints are too tight then we risk flagging correct annotations, whilst if the constraints are too loose, we risk failing to detect problems in the annotations or ontologies.



### Comments
A scope is different from a taxon constraint in it is not inherited by subtypes, at it is not only a constraint, but an expectation. 
For example, we do not expect to find photosynthesis in all bacteria. 

Union classes also needed for cell types. 

# Template 

## Title
[citation]
### Highlights



### Comments