# Opinion articles

## What Is Your Conceptual Definition of “Cell Type” in the Context of a Mature Organism? 
    [@doi:10.1016/j.cels.2017.03.006]
    
### Highlights

Hans Clevers: Hard-wired characteristics ("fate”) + softer features such as morphology, gene expression, location, function, and plasticity.

Susanne Rafelski:  Cell-to-cell variation blurs the lines among cell types and introduces the notion of cell state. Classify cells with a multiscale and multiparameter cell-type space with vectors for key organizational, dynamic, and functional features as well as location, gene expression, etc. Some well-defined groups and some cells lying on a continuum.

Michael Elowitz: Previous notions of cell type don’t always make sense. We should classify cells more like demographers classify people. And as with people, history matters with cells. 

Allon Klein: The concept of “cell type” is poorly defined, but useful. We focus on defining coordinates underlying “cell states.”\textbf{ Cell types have been defined by morphology, ontogeny, function, or molecular composition. No single attribute has served. Coherent patterns in single-cell data serve to define “cell states.” The hard work is relating cell states to “cell types.”.\textbf{We will also find cells that associate with two or more classical “cell types.” Cells rest on a continuum manifold of cell state, cell type divisions are artificial.

Jay Shendure and Cole Trapnell : Slippery concept of “cell type.” Because its complete cell lineage history is known and extensively annotated with functional information, C. elegans. Develop methods and agree on principles that support a cellular taxonomy for C. elegans.

Ed Lein: The concept of “cell type” reduces complexity. A neuronal type could be a genetically encoded circuit element, while an elegant taxonomy should reflect cells’ developmental origin, connectivity, and function. A testable definition of “cell type” is a set of cells with a common transcriptomic signature and low variation in other phenotypes (including connectivity).

Emma Lundberg and Matthias Uhlen: The definition of a cell type should be attributed to its specialized cellular function. Robust classification of a cell type needs  a systems level view of the cell's function.

Alfonso Martinez-Arias: A cell should be defined for what it does, by its phenotype. What we really need is some conceptual breakthrough that allows us to link the molecular make up of a cell to its physiology.

Joshua R. Sanes:  Cell types would ideally be defined by function. However, classification must be based on morphological, physiological, or molecular properties. We can learn from taxonomy (related to species).

Paul Blainey: Cells of a type are functionally equivalent.  We must account for dynamic rhythms in the functional properties of cells,how they interact with neighboring cells and surrounding matrix, their diurnal cycles, and their response to the changing nutritional and activity states of the organisms in which they reside.

James Eberwine: The functional cell type that is of most interest. Therefore, the best descriptor of cell type may be a dynamical measure of the rates of the cellular constituent changes giving rise to particular physiologies.

Junhyong Kim: In biology, a classic “type” problem is “What is a species?”. Applying “closely resembling cells” is appealing but difficult. As found in systematics, a universally satisfying definition of types is not likely to be possible. What cellular properties are important? The properties relevant to the system-level roles of a cell.

J. Christopher Love: To define a cell type requires first considering what a cell is. It samples its environment, and  responds to those inputs, modifying its “state” on a variety of timescales. Redefine the meaning of cell type to encompass dynamic landscapes.

### Comments

Lots of good points. Functional definitions seem to be really important. Discussion about states is also present. Comments point also to the need of the classifcation to be useful do describe the biology of the organism. 

## Exciting times to study the identity and evolution of cell types 
    [@doi:10.1242/dev.178996]
    
### Highlights

Questions:
-  How can we define a cell type?
-  What are the molecular mechanisms of cell identity?
-  Can we compare cell types across
species and phyla?
- How did cell types first originate?
-  What computational methods can be used to study cell type biology?
\end{enumerate

Traditionally, a cell type is s a morphologically distinguishable entity that performs a specific function within an organism.

In the placozoan Trichoplax adhaerens, there are around 50 cell transcriptional cell types, but only six morphological ones.

Variations occur in scRNAseq data also due to variation of cell states;

Tanay proposed the concept of ‘metacells’ which captures cells that likely come from similar statistical distribution. Metacells can reflect cell types or cell states, small variation in secondary gene modules within bigger clusters, or transcriptional gradients.
 
The identities of cells regarding cell types are not static: the cells go through developmental processes such as differentiation or may have their programs re-defined in regeneration and reprogramming. Barbara Treutlein studies these processes.
 
Arendt et al made a full-body cell atlas of Platynereis dumerilii. It currently combines whole-body imaging at the resolution of electron microscopy with single cell RNAseq data.
 
--> (Several talks focused on cell type evolution in vertebrates.)
 
Allon Klein (Harvard University, USA) studies orthology between cell types through comparisons in pairs of model systems with different divergence times. He highlighted that, to study the evolution of cell states, it is essential to measure their similarity accurately.
 
It is possible to identify conserved components of GRNs (gene regulatory networks). In larger evolutionary distances the homology of GRN components might be hindered by high sequence divergence.
 
### Comments

Good assembly of research projects on the evolution of cell types.

Concept of "‘Recombination’ between cell types" as a mechanism to form new cell types in the end highlights the notion of intersected cell types. As they inevitably overlap.
 
## Function first: classifying cell types and circuits of the retina
    [@doi:10.1016/j.conb.2018.10.011]
    
### Highlights

Here, we argue that functional information about retinal cells should be prioritized over other criteria. In total, the mammalian retina likely contains 100 neuron types alone. A scheme resulting from one criterion can be puzzlingly misaligned with a scheme resulting from another criterion.

Are the genetically identified JAM-B cells functionally of a single type, several distinct but regional types, or, perhaps, a spectrum of types? 

DS RGCs are well-defined and consistent in terms of function and circuitry, and numerous genetic markers that label DS RGCs there is none that clearly captures the funcionally defined population of DS RGCs.

Create useful, working definitions of cell types (nominal definitions) that aid in the project of identifying, studying, and exchanging knowledge about them. Second, once a classification scheme is completely developed, this can reveal the essential features of each cell type — their real definitions.

--> The essentialist view resurfacing 40 years later, see  [@wikidata:Q41052480]

From a practical standpoint, the usefulness of a given classification depends on the specific inquiry a scientist chooses to undertake: to understand the development of circuits, prioritizing a connectomic classification would be essential. To understand differences in evolutionary origin of cell types or their protein expression, an mRNA transcription profile-based classification may be more useful than one based on cell morphology.

Should a cell type be divided into three types because of differences in gene expression, when the functional properties are observed to be the same for the stimulus set used?

One example of well-aligned retinal classification schemes are Bipolar cells (BCs) of the mouse retina. Studies using functional, morphological or genetic criteria converge onto the same number of 14 bipolar cell types. There are 3 different type 5 BC ‘versions’ (types 5t, 5o and 5i). Interestingly, both morphologically and genetically, the type 5 BCs are very close together.

If gene expression or morphology is prioritized in classifying these cells, a popular criterion at the moment, then there are three cell types. However, one could argue that type 5 BCs should be considered one functional type for the time being until a clear functional/ circuit-level criterion can be used to divide them up.

For us, these results suggest that the circuit context of these cells lead to important functional differences that one would want to recognize in a functional classification scheme. Recently, several large-scale classifications have been published, and many recent datasets now include much larger populations of retinal cells than before.

In our view, an ideal classification approach may require utilizing a set of classification criteria depending on the hypothesis in question.

### Comments

Talks about the retina as a good tissue for these considerations, due to well defined and well characterized cell types, a simplicity of types of input and output and the fact that any patch contains likely almost all cell types.

Arguments kind of revolve around each cell having one "final type". Cells have  multiple types. And a type that contain more than one subtype regarding one property, might be the "end type" for that one.

Very similar subdivisions as a product of technical issues --> The necessity of robustness. 

Same cells, circuitry differences imply functional differences! But identical cups used for flour and for beer are the same type of cup?

The final point of "In our view, an ideal classification approach may require utilizing a set of classification criteria depending on the hypothesis in question ." is quite the same of mine. 

## Defining cell types and states with single-cell genomics
    [@wikidata:Q26782737]
    
### Highlights

Human bodies are said to have 210 different types of cells. However, this taxonomy is still bewilderingly diverse.

Perhaps, for example, “CD14+ monocytes” actually consist of multiple subpopulations that share CD14 expression in common. 

In 1957, C.H. Waddington proposed a powerful metaphor for how differentiated cell types emerge from a single, totipotent cell. A dynamical systems view of the cell. A cell’s state at a given time as a point in “gene regulation space.” As the cell regulates gene expression during development, it moves through the space along a trajectory. The central question posed by Waddington is: Where will the cell end up?

Stuart Kauffmann theorized that not only can cell fate transitions be described by a dynamical system, but that what we think of as distinct cell types correspond to attractors of that system (Kauffman 1993). An attractor is a location in the state space of a dynamical system that will move toward and to which it will return if perturbed.

Sui Huang showed that a simple regulatory network with just two genes that inhibit one another but promote their own expression is sufficient to generate a hypothetical landscape with three stable cell fates (Huang et al. 2007).

The cells in a single-cell RNA-seq experiment can often be represented in a space with far fewer than 30,000 dimensions: A dimension for each module of genes. If clustering single cells reveals the attractors of the cell state space, can it also be used to find transition paths between stable states?

Ultimately, most single-cell studies aim to identify and characterize the genes that determine where a cell is in the state space and drive a cell to transition from one state to another. 

### Comments
Super cool figure 1. 

## Cell type discovery and representation in the era of high-content single cell phenotyping
    [@doi:10.1186/s12859-017-1977-1]
    
### Highlights

New high-throughput, high-content cytometry and sequencing technologies. The resulting explosion in the number of distinct cell types being identified is challenging the current paradigm for cell type definition in the Cell Ontology.

The Cell Ontology (CL). Two core relations – is_a and develops_from – with is_a used to relate specific cell subtypes to a more general parent cell type, and develops_from used to represent developmental cell lineage relationships.

Masci et al. proposed a major revision to the CL using dendritic cells as the driving biological use case in 2008. Cells were often experimentally-defined based on the expression of specific marker proteins on the cell surface.

Logically coherent asserted framework for defining cell types based on the expression levels of marker proteins. Diehl et al. applied this approach first to cell types of the hematopoietic system and then later to the full CL.

We will provide examples of how data being generated by these high content experimental platforms are used to identify novel cell types in both blood and brain. 

Applying the cell type names used by the investigative team, the cell type definitions derived from the gating hierarchy would then be:

Population #18: Monocytes – a PBMC that expresses HLA-DR and CD14, and lacks CD19 and CD3

Population #19: Dendritic cell (DC) – a PBMC that expresses HLA-DR, and lacks CD14, CD19, and CD3

Monocyte - Morphology: Mononuclear cell, diameter, 14 to 20 μM, N/C ratio 2:1-1:1.
Nucleus may appear in variety of shapes: round, kidney, lobulated, or convoluted. Fine azurophilic granules present; markers: CD11b (shared with other myeloid cells), human: CD14, mouse: F4/80-mid, GR1-low; location: Blood, but can be recruited into tissues; role or process: immune & tissue remodeling; lineage: hematopoietic, myeloid. Myeloid mononuclear recirculating leukocyte that can act as a precursor of tissue macrophages, osteoclasts and some populations of tissue dendritic cells.

CD14-positive monocyte - This cell type is compatible with the HIPC Lyoplate markers for ‘monocyte’. Note that while CD14 is considered a reliable marker for human monocytes, it is only expressed on approximately 85\% of mouse monocytes. A monocyte that expresses CD14 and is negative for the lineage markers CD3, CD19, and CD20.

The CL monocyte definition includes information about cellular and nuclear morphology, for which we have no information from our flow analysis. 

The definition of the CD14-positive monocyte is very close to the monocyte cells identified in the flow cytometry experiment in that they are CD14+, CD3- and CD19-. However, since CD20 expression was not evaluated in the panel, we cannot be absolutely certain if the experimental cells represent an exact match to the CL counterpart.

Even with semantic assertions of marker protein expression used to formally define cell types (Fig. 2c), exact matching is not possible

Inconsistent use of experimentally reproducible criteria for cell type definition in CL. 

``A solution to the partial marker problem is sorely needed.`` 

A fundamental issue has also emerged in considering how to distinguish between discrete cell types and more fluid cell states.
cells are constantly responding and adapting to changes in their environment by subtly changing their phenotypic states.

Challenges:

Matching cell populations identified using assay platforms focused on molecular expression with cell types represented in the reference CL ontology that have been defined using other non-molecular characteristics;

--> impossible without species-specificity
--> impossible without mixing different classes in the same bag

matching cell populations identified using overlapping but non-identical marker panels.

--> technotype hierarchy

Adding new cell populations being rapidly identified with these high-throughput assay platforms to a reference ontology in a timely fashion.

--> open, easy, non burocratic addition, Wikipedia like. Systems for error correction, but freedom to change and make mistakes. Wikidata.

determining what kind of validation would be required to add a novel cell type to a reference ontology;

--> Very good question. Presence across members of a species by deductive reasoning. Confidence of its generalizability for species. Explanation of biological usefulness of such classification. 
determining if a standard naming and definition convention could be developed and adopted.

--> still open. The division between peritypes, conceptual cell types and archetypes

distinguishing between truly discrete cell types and responsive cell states.

--> distinction does not seem to be useful a priori.


Proposals:
- Establish a new working group
- Molecular phenotype-based definitions – The community should continue to focus cell type definitions in the CL on precisely describing the phenotype of the cells, molecular and otherwise, using a series of necessary and sufficient conditions expressed as logical axioms
- CL - If independent validation is required, the CL developers should consider the establishment of a “CL provisional ontology” that could be used to hold provisional cell type assignments.

--> An open system, like Wikidata, could store the data and cell types could be further classified into ontological levels.

- Incomplete overlapping of assessed phenotypes

--> Similar to the peritype proposal, but with the clarification of the species-specificity. Watchout that the use of the word "monocyte" in the definition adds a dangerous layer of vagueness.

- it will be critical to develop conventions for cell type naming and definition using data from transcriptional profiling experiments. For example, the 11 new cell types identified in Fig. 3 could be named by combining marker genes selectively expressed by the cells with the parent cell class and the context

--> Very good naming proposal for transcriptomics. A few points is that human readability is severely limited (not a problem for machines, though) and that this definition excludes cells from other contexts.

- 10.Necessary and sufficient conditions
--> Also, a rigorous definition.

- Use of negative assertions through “lacks expression of”.

--> Absence of property is also a property itself! Rigorous criteria, totally agree. 

- .Cell type matching. implementation and use of the Friedman-Rafsky statistical test in the FlowMap-FR tool for cross- sample cell population matching from flow cytometry data.
--> simpler approach: assignment to a technotype, and then matching between studies based on the ontological network that links both concepts.

- Cell types versus cell states - Our intuition is that there is a distinction between. The challenge is to come up with a coherent and consistent approach for making this distinction. We propose that the distinction relates to the stability and reversibility of the new cellular phenotype. 

--> If a cardiomiocyte does not contract when it is dividing, is it really a miocyte? Also, when you put reprogramming into account (as in the case of axolotls regeneration, for example), bona fide cell types lose their stability. 


### Comments

What does marker mean for a multispecies cell type?!

Is CD14 a marker of monocytes or of human monocytes?

Definition of CD14-monocytes depends on the definition of monocyte, which has way more things that can be measured in any given study.

Peritypes are a solution for the partial marker problem. 

Explosion in the number of new cell types being identified using these unbiased high- throughput/high-content experimental technologies.

Robustness accross same species individuals answers: if the change is robust and useful to understand the biology, than \textbf{yes it is a new cell type strictu sensu.

Precise definition of general cell types implies a degree of vagueness. Subdiving a CL archetype into more specific cell types might be beneficial.

## Opinion: How to Define Cell Type
 [@url:https://www.the-scientist.com/opinion/opinion-how-to-define-cell-type-30668]

### Highlights
 
We now must wrestle with the question of how to define cell types.

Single-cell experiments make it tempting to perform stratification after stratification to continually to identify types, but results in groupings that go far beyond “type” and into functionally irrelevant and arbitrary categories.

One could argue that a biological definition of a cell type should be based on a combination of the cell’s developmental origin and current function.

Cell state may be thought of as the phenotype that occurs when a cell changes any of its extraneous variables, such as location, morphology, or phase of the cell cycle, while maintaining the core characteristics.

"fibroblast is still a fibroblast as it is dividing,"

Once we begin to consider all of the subtle cell-to-cell variations, it becomes clear that the number of cell types is much greater than ever imagined. Molecular markers of cell type as the set of genes that are similarly expressed across all cells with identical function should be consistent across all states. Conversely, markers of cell state would be transient within a given cell type.

There are also models that completely abolish the use of cell types and instead promote deriving a continuum along which all cells exist.

A third option—one that has proven useful in other disciplines, such as species discrimination is a hierarchic taxonomic definition of cell type. This approach has been useful for many of the early cell-type identification papers as it supports classification across multiple layers of what can define a cell type

As the tools to evaluate cellular heterogeneity continue to evolve, so too will the discussion over how to define the subtypes we are able to identify.

### Comments

I disagree that functions remain the same throughout the division process.
Many interesting views. Arbitrary categories may be useful, but should not be mixed with cell types.
Again, tree view of cell types




## Defining cellular identity through network biology
[@pmid:25485572]

### Highlights

Related question remains poorly defined: what is a ‘cell type’? In other words, by what criteria should we categorize cells into classes?

Answering this question is not a mere academic exercise but has deep implications for both developmental biology and for engineering cell fate.

Cells are typically categorized by their physiologic function: red blood cells transport oxygen and motor neurons transmit signals between skeletal muscle and the central nervous system.

Gene regulatory networks (GRNs) determine both the steady-state transcriptional profile of a cell and its response to most perturbations (e.g., stress, lack or surfeit of nutrients, disease, age, etc).

As the persistence of the starting cell type GRN was commonly found across cell engineering paradigms, learning how to overcome this barrier will be crucial.

### Comments