# Other



## Mapping the transcriptional diversity of genetically and anatomically defined cell populations in the mouse brain
    \cite{[@doi:10.7554/eLife.38619]
    
### Highlights
200 genetically identified cell populations, and two gene classes contributing distinctly to neuronal diversity.

Cells from micro-dissected brain regions may contain more than one atomic cell type, we refer to these as genetically- and anatomically-identified cell populations (GACPs).
<-- "atomic cell type", does this concept even make sense? -->

Pan-neuronal genes (genes expressed commonly in all neuronal populations but expressed at lower levels or not at all in nonneuronal cell populations.

Gene families to provide information about cell identities which  is not captured by ’gene-wise’ metrics like mean DEF, or by enrichment analysis.

This suggests that, similar to other tissues homeobox TFs play an important role in specifying cell types in the brain.

Alternative splicing: most branch point choices are made consistently, in an all-or-none fashion, for any given cell population

We assume that cell types are organized hierarchically in a tree-like fashion proceeding from major branches (e.g. ’cortical excitatory neuron’) to more specialized subtypes, with the terminal ’leaf-level’ branches comprising ’atomic’ cell types. Profiled cell populations are defined operationally by the intersection of a transgenic mouse strain (or in some cases anatomical projection target) and a brain region.

### Comments

"atomic cell type", does this concept even make sense?

Treats groups not as cell types, but as genetically- and anatomically-identified cell populations (GACPs).

Explicit assumption of hierarchy and atomic cell types!

## Terminal Selectors of Neuronal Identity
    [@doi:10.1016/bs.ctdb.2015.12.007]
    
### Highlights

Terminal identity features of a mature neuron are often coregulated by so-called terminal selector transcription factors.

Emphasize core features of this concept in the C. elegans system such as coregulation of terminal effector batteries, combinatorial control mechanisms, and the coupling of initiation and maintenance of neuronal identity.

Molecular characterization of these behavioral mutants showed that many of them affect tran- scription factors that turned out to act at the terminal step of differentiation of postmitotic neurons.

These molecular markers, built by the community over the past 20 years (curated at www.wormbase.org), monitor the neuron-type specific expression of hundreds of genes that define terminal properties of a neuron type.

Given the neuron identity-defining properties, I proposed to call these transcription factors “terminal selectors.This terminology is an extension of the selector gene concept, originally proposed by Garcia-Bellido (1975).

Identity-defining terminal effector genes are coregulated.

Terminal selectors control regulatory subroutines

Every fully differentiated neuron type is uniquely defined by the expression of a unique combination  of “nuts and bolts,” “terminal effector” genes that code for proteins that define the functional features of a mature neuron type.

Even in a nervous system as comparatively simple as C. elegans, only very few terminal effector genes are exclusively expressed in a single neuron type.

A key defining feature of terminal selectors is that they are are continuously expressed throughout the life of the neuron to maintain the differentiated state of a neuron.

Terminal selectors are combinations of cooperating factors.

There may be a spectrum of distinct types of cooperation between terminal selectors, depending on cis-regulatory architecture of individual effector genes.

There are a number of key implications of the combinatorial activity of terminal selectors.

Terminal selectors control the expression of many if not all  effector genes expressed in a neuron-type-specific manner and which define the identity of a neuron type. 

However, terminal selectors do not control the expression of all genes in a terminally differentiated neuron type.

At the time of writing the original essay on the terminal selector concept, only a handful of examples of such selector genes has been described.

The purpose of this chapter has been to provide a description of the general features of gene regulatory programs that operate in terminally differentiated neuron types throughout the C. elegans nervous system

### Comments

118 anatomically defined neuron types 

## Construction of a human cell landscape at single-cell level
    \cite{citation
    
### Highlights

Master TFs work in discrete modules to specify major human cell types such as neuron, erythroid cell and cainar cell. 

Mapping of human cell types by  scHCL. Match to reference transcriptomes by correlation. 

Integrated data to the Mouse Cell Atlas.

We propose a landscape model that is conserved in mammal: stem cells are transcriptionally "indistinct" and "stochastic" and differentiated cells are transcriptionally "distinct" and "stable"; the wiring of the regulons in the genome pre determines the terminal steady cellular states.
### Comments

## The Definition of Cell Type
    [@doi:10.1161/01.RES.84.10.1234]
    
### Highlights
What do we mean by “cell type?” 

We know that cultured smooth muscle cells obtained in different ways have different stable phenotypes. These results suggested that the cultures somehow represent a model for the cells forming the neointima in vivo.


One implication of definitive analyses of gene expression should be a redefinition ofwhat we mean by cell type. Currently “cell type” is defined, in most cases, either by morphology or by a small number of genes that have been identified with that tissue.

In summary, biology is changing. We have the tools to explore hypothesis-based studies in increasingly minute detail. At the same time, systematic exploration will provide us with more pathways to be defined. As such studies proceed, the functional map will get more and more complex. The challenge will be to discriminate critical mechanistic steps from less important details.


### Comments
"These studies, taken together, illustrate a major change in how we define cell type, a change that is about to be accelerated by the power of systematic genomics" --> Initial description of how transcriptomics would change our view of cell type diversity


Addresses a bit of the difference between native cell types and cultured cell types.


# Template 

## The Human Cell Atlas: from vision to reality
[@doi:10.1038/550451a]
### Highlights

As an ambitious project to map all the cells in the human body gets officially under way, Aviv Regev, Sarah Teichmann and colleagues outline some key challenges.

For more details on how the atlas will be built as an open global resource, see the white paper2 posted on the Human Cell Atlas website.

In cellular taxonomy, it might enable the discovery and identification of cell types and molecular markers or signatures (a collection of genes, say, that characterize a specific cell type).

“To have maximum impact, the Human Cell Atlas must be an open resource, on multiple levels.”

The first draft of the atlas will profile cells’ molecular and spatial characteristics, capturing only those cell types that occur above a pre-specified rarity — ones that make up more than 1% of a sample, say.

A similar step-wise strategy was deployed in the Human Genome Project; even a partially assembled genome proved immediately useful to researchers, and human genetic variation in health and disease was tackled over several years after the full genome was sequenced. 

As much as possible, the atlas must reflect the diversity of humans and human experience.

Descriptors such as ‘cell type’ and ‘cell state’ can be difficult to define at the moment. An integrative, systematic effort by many teams of scientists working together and bringing different expertise to the problem could dramatically sharpen our terminology, and revolutionize the way we see our cells, tissues and organs. We invite you to join the effort.

### Comments

# Template 

## CELLPEDIA: a repository for human cell information for cell studies and differentiation analyses
[@doi:10.1093/database/bar046]
### Highlights

CELLPEDIA features 
- (i) its own cell classification scheme, in which whole human cells are classified by their physical locations in addition to conventional taxonomy; and 
- (ii) cell differentiation pathways compiled from biomedical textbooks and journal papers. Currently, human differentiated cells and stem cells are classified into 2260 and 66 cell taxonomy keys, respectively, from which 934 parent–child relationships reported in cell differentiation or transdiffer- entiation pathways are retrievable.

Many histology and molecular biology textbooks state that there are ?200 types of cells in the adult human body (2). However, this classical observa- tion is mainly based on the morphological or histological perspective, and no cell classification system based on gene expression levels has yet been systematically established.

Inspired by the importance of cell studies early on, we developed a gene expression profile data search system called ‘CellMontage’ in 2004, where we also provided a draft version of a cell catalogue (13).

The latest version of CELLPEDIA consists of two major cell categories: ‘differentiated cell’ and ‘stem cell’. The ‘differ- entiated cell’ category contains information of fully differ- entiated or mature cells that represent specific functions or characteristics, whereas the ‘stem cell’ category contains information of undifferentiated or immature cells, such as progenitor or multipotent stem cells.

In typical textbooks, cells with equivalent or similar func- tions are given the same name even if they exist in different physical locations. For instance, ‘goblet cells’ are found in the nose, lung and small and large intestines.

CELLPEDIA defines its own enhanced cell taxonomy for physically distinct cells, establishing a hierarchical structure of up to eight levels from organs (or tissues) to cells. It presents a combination of both conventional cell taxonomy and their physical locations (Figure 1a).

To avoid con- fusion, we have added a ‘Population’ category in the gene expression data table to provide information of the data resource. ‘Heterogeneous’ means that the gene expression data are measured from a heterogeneous cell population

--> Which population is not heterogeneous??
### Comments
 It became extended to https://stemcellinformatics.org/


## Human Cell Atlas and cell-type authentication for regenerative medicine
[@doi:10.1038/s12276-020-0421-1]
### Highlights
The objective of this review is to survey the current progress in the field of cell-type identification, starting with the Human Cell Atlas project, which aims to sequence every cell in the human body, to molecular marker databases for individual cell types and other sources that address cell-type identification for regenerative medicine based on cell data guidelines.

The challenge for the HCA project is to create a universal classification system for all of these projects. Adding to this challenge are regional HCAs, such as HCA Asia, that focus on regional diseases.

To expedite methods for cell-type identification, the
HCA project has multiple committees and working groups that coordinate the efforts of independent research groups and unify the results of scRNA-seq. Typically, the research groups perform all the data preparation, acqui- sition, and analysis, and the HCA committees provide the general framework, guidelines, and data repository space

several cell marker databases are available?

- Labome provides a list of 226 markers for epithelial, dendritic, glial, bone marrow, natural killer, and other cell types.

- CellFinder was the first database website of molecular markers and now features information on 3394 cell types, 50,951 cell lines, and 553,905 protein expres- sions

- CellMarker44, which cur- rently features 13,605 cell markers for 467 cell types in 158 human tissue and 9148 cell markers for 389 cell types in 81 mouse tissues

- At approximately the same time, PanglaoDB was published45, providing data on 8230 markers collected from human and mouse scRNA-seq experiments.

In some cases, heterogeneity, such as that during states of immaturity or senescence, blurs discrete states, leaving a continuous spectrum that greatly complicates cell-type classification (Fig. 1). In such cases, cell types may seem to have hundreds of variants

To help consolidate the many opinions about cell-type
classification and provide data-related guidelines for cell- type authentication for clinical application, the Interna- tional Cell Type Authentication Committee (ICTAC) was created (https://cell-type.org/). The ICTAC was launched to establish criteria and processes for defining, deter- mining, and authenticating all human cell types. 

The ICTAC proposed the concept of reference cell
types (RCTs), which are defined by an integrative examination of core properties (species, physiological system, source age, and markers) and additional attri- butes (functions including potency, morphology, devel- opmental origin, omics, and environmental conditions) and are constantly updated by experts of relevant tissues and organs.

Advances in microscopy, histology, and, now, omics technologies have made it clear that the list of cell types is much longer than originally imagined.

### Comments











## SHOGoiN Cell Database
[@url:https://stemcellinformatics.org/]
### Highlights

On the integration page for B cell, the user can obtain various types of data associated to B cell. For example,

- SHOGoiN Cell Taxonomy provides general profile information associated with B cells such as germ layer, differentiation status, source age, anatomical location, and cell type.
- SHOGoiN Cell Transcriptome provides single-cell transcriptome assay data and metadata.
- SHOGoiN Cell Conversion provides literature-curated cell differentiation and transdifferentiation information.
- SHOGoiN Marker provides literature-curated cell type marker information (marker molecule name, molecular type; gene, protein etc., subcellular location, link to UniProt, gene ID).
- Image provides cell images clipped from tissue images and morphological analysis data.
- Orthologous Cell provides literature-curated information about orthologous cell types among different species.

: What is the difference of SHOGoiN with other databases?
A: Our features are as follows.
    1. The misidentification of cell types can be prevented by using the 5 factor ID code.
    2. The ID code integrates five pieces of information: a) cell lineage map, b) transcriptome/methylome analysis information, c) cell conversion information, d) cell marker information and e) cell/tissue image information.
    3. It is possible to integrate information quickly from other databases (Cellfinder, LifeMap Discovery™ and so on) into SHOGoiN by using the ID code.

Q: What does the term "SHOGoiN Cell ID" mean?
    A: SHOGoiN Cell ID consists of Anatomy ID (22 digits) and Cell Type ID (3 digits).


(query for neuron)
        Cell Type Name                                                Cell Type Subclass          SHOGoiN Cell Id
    33	Central Nervous System Cell:neuron	                         Cholinergic Neuron	       1010000000000000000000-189	Neural (brain)
    46	Central Nervous System Cell:neuron	                         Dopaminergic Neuron	   1010000000000000000000-189	Neural (brain)
    105	Central Nervous System Cell:neuron	                         	                       1010201030000000000000-189	Cerebral Cortex, Temporal Lobe
    109	Central Nervous System Cell:neuron	                         	                       1010201030000000000000-189	Cerebral Cortex, Temporal Lobe
(query for astrocyte)                                
     4	Central Nervous System Cell:Astrocyte                         		                   1010201030000000000000-018	Cerebral Cortex, Temporal Lobe
     8  Central Nervous System Cell:Astrocyte                         	 Mature	               1010201030000000000000-018	Cerebral Cortex, Temporal Lobe
    46	Central Nervous System Cell:Astrocyte Precursor  Cell                   	           1010201030000000000000-910	Cerebral Cortex, Temporal Lobe
    49	Central Nervous System Cell:Astrocyte                         		                   7110002000100000000000-018	Forebrain
             
--> Cell IDs are not unique! But they change for some cell types and, always change across tissues.
### Comments


## Developing Global Cellular Information Retrieval System with Minimum Reporting Guidelines on Cellular Data for Regenerative Medicine

[@doi:10.18547/gcb.2017.vol3.iss2.e50]
### Highlights

To maximize a value placed on the information in stem cell and derivative cell research, we have proposed reporting guidelines for describing cellular assay data to pursue the facilitation of practical regenerative medicine named Minimum Information About a Cellular Assay for Regenerative Medicine (MIACARM).

Although the number of produced cellular data has been multiplied dramatically, it is still hard to fully utilize them due to a lack of standardization of cellular assay reporting formats. It consequently causes difficulties in experimental reproducibility and data exchange among cell banks and laboratories.

MIACARM-I has items to describe omics assays in basic research using human cells, and MIACARM-II has items for practical regenerative medicine which include items for quality and safety of cells.

Basic structure of MIACARM was created by reorganizing the existing Minimum Information About a Cellular Assay (MIACA) [5]
- Assay
Assay design summary 
Assay type

- Source cell
Cell identification
Cell taxonomy 
Anatomical location 
Stem cell production 
Stem cell quality control 

- Experimental technology
Sample preparation 
Detection technology

- Data
Data type
Data processing

### Comments
http://miaca.sourceforge.net/

## The human body at cellular resolution: the NIH Human Biomolecular Atlas Program
[@doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1629-x]
### Highlights

NIH Common Fund Human Biomolecular Atlas Program (HuBMAP) intends to develop a widely accessible framework for comprehensively mapping the human body at single- cell resolution by supporting technology development, data acquisition, and detailed spatial mapping.

Three-dimensional organization of different cell types, together with the effects of cell–cell and cell–matrix interactions in their natural milieu, have a profound impact on normal function, natural ageing, tissue remodelling, and disease progression in different tissues and organs.

 three components: 
 (1) tissue mapping centres (TMCs); 
 (2) HuBMAP integration, visualization and engagement (HIVE) collaborative components; and
 (3) innovative technologies groups (transformative technology development (TTD) and rapid technology implementation (RTI))

 analyse a broad range of largely normal tissues, representing both sexes, different ethnicities and a variety of ages across the adult lifespan

--> adult lifespan!

The molecular state of each cell will be revealed by single-cell transcriptomic11 and, in many cases, chromatin accessibility12,13 assays.

imputation of transcription factor binding regions from the open chromatin data combined with the gene expression data will be used to explain the regulation of gene expression across the distinct cell types.

Open source portals will use recognized standards and be interoperable with other platforms, such as the HCA Data Coordination Platform, making it possible to readily add, update, and use new software modules.

HuBMAP envisions a strategy inspired by other tissue atlas efforts36–38 that leverages the identifica- tion of ‘landmark’ features, including key anatomical structures and canonical components of tissue organization (for example, epidermal boundaries and normally spatially invariant vasculature) that can be identified in all individuals.

Determining the number of cells, fields of view, and samples needed to capture rare cell types, states or tissue structures is an important challenge.

Ultimately, we hope to catalyse novel views on the organization of tissues, regarding not only which types of cells are neighbouring one another, but also the gene and protein expression patterns that define these cells, their phenotypes, and functional interactions.

These data have the potential to redefine types or subtypes of cells and their relationships within and between tissues beyond the traditional under- standing that can be obtained through standard methods (for example, microscopy and flow cytometry).



### Comments
https://commonfund.nih.gov/hubmap

## An estimation of the number of cells in the human body
[@doi:10.3109/03014460.2013.807878]
### Highlights
In particular, the reported total cell number of a human being ranges between 1012 and 1016 and it is widely mentioned without a proper reference. Aim: To study and discuss the theoretical issue of the total number of cells that compose the standard human adult organism. Subjects and methods: A systematic calculation of the total cell number of the whole human body and of the single organs was carried out using bibliographical and/or mathematical approaches.

Since Schleiden’s and Schwann’s first formulations of cell theory (Mazzarello, 1999), it has been known that all living organisms are made of individual and identifiable cells.

Cell number, on the other hand, appears to be under strict genetic and developmental control in lower organisms: for example, bacteria and yeasts are composed of single cells, while the adult Caenorhabditis elegans worm consists of exactly 959 (male) or 1031 (ermaphrodite) somatic cells

The aim of this work is to discuss the theoretical issue of the total number of cells that compose the standard human adult organism. First, we noticed that these data were typically mentioned in the literature without citing a reference; second, we observed wide ranges among data reported by different sources, ranging from 1012–1020.

Since the cell number and cell size of various organs or systems, as well as the size of the organ or system itself, may vary according to several parameters such as age, sex, weight, pathology or evolutionary adaptations, we searched for a single reference for the ‘‘average man’’ or ‘‘standard human being’’. Since this does not exist, for the purposes of this work we chose a 30-year old young adult, weighing 70 kg, 1.72m tall and with a body area of 1.85m2 (Irving, 2007).

Therefore, since the mean weight of a mammalian cell has been estimated to be 1 ng (Makarieva et al., 2008), for a standard body weight of 70 kg (Irving, 2007), there would be 7 x 10 to the 13 cells.

The results of our bibliographical research show considerable variation in terms of order of magnitude, which is not justifiable by inter- individual differences (see Appendix A, Table A1). Furthermore, we noted a consistent lack of citations of the original literature providing the pertinent data in printed books, online available books and websites. 

From an evolutionary point of view, data about cell number in different species could allow a measure of organism and organ complexity valuable in order to classify and understand inter-species variability at phenotypic level (Herculano-Houzel, 2011; Kothari et al., 1978). The formal description of cell types and number of different organisms could be valuable, in conjunction with other measures of complexity such as gene number and function (Szathmary

### Comments

## Title
[@doi:]
### Highlights



### Comments