
# Computational single-cell research
## Searching large-scale scRNA-seq databases via unbiased cell embedding with Cell BLAST
    \cite{cao2020searching
    
### Highlights
Herein, we present Cell BLAST, cell-querying method built on a neural network-based generative model and a cell-to-cell similarity metric.

Intuitively, low-dimensional embeddings of cells from the same cell type should reconstruct each other better than cells from different cell types. 

Our generative model combined with posterior-based similarity metric enables Cell BLAST to model the continuous spectrum of cell states more accurately.

Constructing a large-scale well-curated reference database.

A comprehensive and well-curated reference database is crucial for the practical application of Cell BLAST. 

Empirical case study shows that both the incorporation of hit similarity and ontology structure lead to improved Cell Ontology assignment.

Metadata were further manually curated by adding additional descriptions in the paper to acquire the most detailed information of each cell.

We unified raw cell type annotation by Cell Ontology. Closest Cell Ontology terms were manually assigned based on the Cell Ontology description and context of the study.

BLAST2CO. BLAST2CO can perform Cell Ontology (CL) inference for query cells as long as the reference datasets are annotated with Cell Ontology. For each CL existent in the hit cells, BLAST2CO calculates its confidence score by summing up the similarity of all hit cells belonging to the particular CL. 
The confidence scores are assigned to corresponding nodes in the CL graph, and then propagated to parent nodes along the graph.

If more than one CLs match the above conditions, the query cell is labeled as “ambiguous”. If no CL matches the above conditions, the query cell is labeled as “rejected.”

### Comments

"cell type resolution" is an interesting concept. 

Phrases like "All five ionocytes predicted as club cells by Cell BLAST are also agreed on by scmap." cast a shadow of doubt on the original annotations. 
"continuous spectrum of cell states more accurately."  cell states are very explictly assumed to lie on a continuous spectrum
Annotation of cell types with Cell Ontology is strictly wrong (albeit being better than no annotatino at all)
Annotates each single cell with a ranking of "terminal" cell types. 

The ppropagation of annotations is very useful. 

## CellFishing.jl: an ultrafast and scalable cell search method for single-cell RNA sequencing
    [@doi:10.1186/s13059-019-1639-x]
    
### Highlights
We propose CellFishing.jl, a new method for searching atlas-scale datasets for similar cells.

This trend of sequencing higher numbers of cells is expected to continue until a complete list of cell types is generated.


Cell type estimation accomplished by matching query cells with similar cells found in anno- tated data sets provides important information concerning the query cells, relying on a single similarity score may result in overlooking significant differences in their gene expressions.

For example, the developmental stages of the hematopoietic lineage from stem cells to completely differentiated cells are often characterized by the expression level of few marker genes. 
Additionally, using scRNA-seq, Park et al. revealed that genes related to Mendelian disease are differentially expressed in specific cell types.
These facts indicate that mutually similar cells of the same type but under different conditions can be further distin- guished by noting differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between these cells

We next confirmed that the hashed expression profiles preserve the original differences among cell types by visualizing low-dimensional embedding of the data.

CellFishing.jl evidently includes minor cell types, although the scores are relatively unsta- ble for those cell types. For example, while Baron2016 contains only 18 Schwann cells and seven T cells, CellFishing.jl found these cell types with high consistency.

Comparing transcriptome expressions across different species provides important information on the function of unknown cell types. Since the Baron2016 data set includes cells derived from human and mouse, we attempted to match cells between both species. A total of 12,413 one-to-one gene pairs were included

### Comments

What is a "complete list of cell types" !?


## Probabilistic gene expression signatures identify cell-types from single cell RNA-seq data
    \cite{grabski2020probabilistic
    
### Highlights

Here we present a computationally light statistical approach, based on Naive Bayes, that leverages public datasets to combine information across thousands of genes and probabilistically assign cell-type identity.

This improved granularity permits the identification or discovery of distinct populations of cell-types within the tissues under study. To effectively accomplish this, it is important to classify cells reliably into known cell-types, in particular cells that are present in many tissues such as immune system cells.

For instance, in CD4 cells, the markers had non-zero counts in anywhere from 0\% to 38\% of the cells. As a result, many marker genes that have been established as reliable indicators of cell-type on the bulk level are no longer adequate on the single cell level.

Naive Bayes [12], that defines a conditional distribution for each target cell by estimating a cell-type-specific expression rate for each gene

"These findings suggest that the identity assigned to a given cell depends on the size of the dataset, in a way that is not representative of the actual cell-types in the data"


Specifically, we selected marker genes for CD4 (IL7R, CD4, CTLA4, FOXP3, IL2RA, PTPRC), CD14 (CD14, LYZ, FCGR3A, CD68, S100A12), CD8 (CD8A, CRTAM, NCR3, CD3D), and NK cells (GNLY, NKG7, PRR5L, S1PR5, NCAM1) that have been curated and well-established in the literature as discriminating among cell types 

We explicitly include the total number of observed transcripts Ni to account for the varying coverage across cells [24]. Note that the vector (λ1k, . . . , λJk)? can be considered the expression profile that defines cell-type k.

this approach allows the certainty of the classification to be directly quantified. For example, if a target cell has a relatively low probability of belonging to any of the reference cell-types, this might indicate contamination or potentially a novel cell-type population.

We explicitly model the cell-type-specific probability distributions of these genes with a hierarchical approach that increases power in the presence of sparsity.


### Comments

Interesting. We want to study the cell types themselves, not the cells per se. 


## CHETAH: a selective, hierarchical cell type identification method for single-cell RNA sequencing
    [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkz543]
    
### Highlights
CHETAH (CHaracterization of cEll Types Aided by Hierarchical classification) is an accurate cell type identification algorithm.

Single cell RNA sequencing has paved the way for discovering previously uncharacterized cell types and this application too would greatly benefit from efficient identification of known cell types prior to focusing on new types

Analyses are becoming more complex given the fast-expanding catalogue of defined cell types (15).

For example, if the evidence for a very specific cell type assignment such as effector CD8 T-cell is not strong enough, assignment such as T cell may  be useful.

The correct T-cell subtype may be not part of the reference dataset, or even that there is in- sufficient read-depth for the more specific call to be made. CHETAH’s classification is a stepwise process that traverses the tree and, depending on the available evidence, ends at one of the reference cell types or halts at the unassigned or one of the intermediate types.
 
It is firmly established that hierarchical trees derived from clustering gene expression data reflect many aspects of the underlying biology (52). <-- Strong affirmation -->

For the method presented here, the definition of cell type is pragmatic and can best be described as any group of cells annotated within a reference set as belonging together.

### Comments

argues that we need to identify what we know before we can efficiently focus on new types. 

explicitly assumes one tree

explicitly defines cell type! awesome!


## R Package: Single-cell RNAseq cell cluster labelling by reference
    \url{https://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/celaref/inst/doc/celaref_doco.html
    
### Highlights

 The annotation of the ‘cell type’ of each cluster is performed by a domain expert biologist 
 
 A list of ‘Up’ genes are extracted for each query cluster. Then, those genes are looked up in the ranking of genes in each reference cell cluster. 
 
 There can be none, one or multiple reference group similarities for the query group.
 
 
### Comments

Uses a lot of p values, but null hypothesis are not clear. The word "null" is not mentioned once.


## PanglaoDB: a web server for exploration of mouse and human single-cell RNA sequencing data
    \cite{franzen2019panglaodb
    
### Highlights

A community-curated cell-type marker compendium.

Deposited data often remain difficult to access as it requires significant pre-processing to become useful for regular analysis.

Our database provides a manually curated list of cell-type markers that can be incorporated into novel algorithms for inference of cell types.

The database of cell type markers was compiled by
manual curation of thousands of published articles and abstracts, and by querying internet search engines with strings such as ‘GENE1 is expressed in ∗ cells’.

The cell-type identity is then determined using the collection of cell-type marker genes. Some marker genes are found in multiple cell types and are less informative for cell-type inference.

In such cases it is possible to compare if the predicted cell type matches the ‘biological’ cell type. We identified 17 independent datasets with homogeneous cell-type populations, where the biological cell type has been reported.

At the time when this work was initiated, there was no published database or comprehensive list of genes that can be used for automatic cell-type assignment [CellMarker (41) came out when this manuscript was in preparation].

### Comments



## Unifying single-cell annotations based on the Cell Ontology
[@doi:10.1101/810234]
### Highlights

Here, we present OnClass, an algorithm and accompanying software for automatically classifying cells into cell types part of the controlled vocabulary that forms the Cell Ontology.
It uses the Cell Ontology graph to infer cell type relationships.

OnClass can be used not only as an annotation tool for single cell datasets but also as an algorithm to identify marker genes specific to each term of the Cell Ontology, offering the possibility of refining the Cell Ontology using a data-centric approach.

The Cell Ontology offers a controlled vocabulary for cell types and has been proposed as the basis for consistently annotating large-scale single-cell atlases.

Assigning cells to terms (i.e., cell types) in the Cell Ontology has at least three challenges:

- most of these cell type terms are not associated with marker genes.
- supervised learning approaches can be used to predict Cell Ontology terms that have curated annotations, they are unable to classify cells to unseen terms
- The Cell Ontology is not developed specifically for scRNA-seq, it likely misses new cell types and cell states and so certain cell type relationships might be inaccurate

Since OnClass annotated cells even to previously unseen Cell Ontology terms according to the annotated cells from other Cell Ontology terms, its performance greatly relied on the quality of cell type embeddings.

In the state-of-the-art single-cell integration frameworks, datasets from different technologies are aligned in the same low-dimensional space by using mutual nearest neighbors as anchors to connect them. Indeed, our method can be considered to be aligning the Cell Ontology to the gene expression matrix by using known annotations as anchors




## Identifying gene expression programs of cell-type identity and cellular activity with single-cell RNA-Seq
[@doi:10.7554/eLife.43803]

### Highlights
Identifying gene expression programs underlying both cell-type identity and cellular activities (e.g. life-cycle processes, responses to environmental cues) is crucial for understanding the organization of cells and tissues. Although single-cell RNA-Seq (scRNA-Seq) can quantify transcripts in individual cells, each cell’s expression profile may be a mixture of both types of programs, making them difficult to disentangle.

Consensus non-negative matrix factorization (cNMF) accurately refines cell types and identifies both expected (e.g. cell cycle and hypoxia) and novel activity programs.

Individual cells may express multiple GEPs but we only detect cellular expression profiles that reflect their combination, rather than the GEPs themselves.

We group these into two broad classes of expression programs that can be detectable in scRNA-Seq data: 
(1) GEPs that correspond to the identity of a specific cell type such as hepatocyte or melanocyte (identity programs)
(2) GEPs that are expressed independently of cell type, in any cell that is carrying out a specific activity such as cell division or immune cell activation (activity programs).

We hypothesized that we could infer activity GEPs directly from variation in single-cell expression
profiles using matrix factorization.

We refer to the second matrix as a ‘usage’ matrix as it specifies how much each GEP is ‘used’ by each cell in the dataset (Stein-O’Brien et al., 2018) (Figure 1A). Unlike hard clustering, which reduces all cells in a cluster to a single shared GEP, matrix factorization allows cells to express multiple GEPs.

GEPs corre- sponding to different phases of the cell cycle are examples of widespread activity programs and are well-known to confound identity (cell type) program inference in scRNA-Seq data.

We distinguished between identity and activity programs by using the fact that activity programs can occur in multiple diverse cell types while identity programs represent a single-cell type.

Most cells had high usage of just a single GEP, which is consistent with expressing just an identity program.

cNMF was further able to refine cell types by disentangling the contributions of identity and activ-
ity programs to the gene expression of cells. For example, we found that a cell cluster labeled in Quadrato et al. (2017) as ‘proliferative precursors’, based on high expression of cell-cycle genes, is composed of multiple cell types including immature muscle and dopaminergic neurons.

Identification of activity programs in neurons of the visual cortex.

In this study, we distinguished between cell type (identity) and cell type independent (activity) gene expression programs (GEPs) to motivate our use of matrix factorization, which represents cells as lin- ear combinations of multiple GEPs.

However, we note that some biological programs are not neatly classified as either identity or activity GEPs. For example, cell states reflecting oncogenic transforma- tion, or a cell’s position along a morphological gradient blur the distinction between identity and activity. In addition, stochastic fluctuations in individual transcription factors could result in coordi- nated gene expression changes (Thattai and van Oudenaarden, 2001) and might be better described as a third program category, rather than as an identity or activity GEP. While the identity/ activity distinction might not be appropriate in every case, matrix factorization should, in principle, be appropriate for representing all gene expression states that can be reasonably approximated as a linear mixture of programs.

Beyond simply discovering activity programs, cNMF clarified the underlying cell types in these datasets by disentangling activity and identity programs from the mixed single-cell profiles.

A more fundamental limitation of matrix factorizations, including cNMF, is the built-in assumption
that cells can be modeled as linear combinations of GEPs.


### Comments


## Discovering Novel Cell Types across Heterogeneous Single-cell Experiments
[@doi:10.1101/2020.02.25.960302]
### Highlights

Here we present MARS, a meta-learning approach for identifying and annotating known as well as novel cell types.
MARS has a unique ability to discover cell types that have never been seen before and annotate experiments that are yet unannotated.
MARS ac- curately identifies cell types, even when it has never seen them before. Further, the method automatically generates interpretable names for novel cell types

Ability to generalize to an unannotated experiment and to capture the similarity of cell types across annotated and unannotated experiments.

We find that MARS aligns all cell types except the set of natural killer (NK) cells. NK cells change their position at every time point (Fig. 1c), indicating the existence of transcriptional changes.

MARS relies on the cell-type landmarks in the annotated experiments to probabilistically define cell type based on its region in the low-dimensional embed- ding space. Probabilities are assigned to landmarks in proportion to their probability density under Gaussian centered at a target unannotated cell type (Methods)

--> No discussion about naming!

### Comments




## Eleven grand challenges in single-cell data science
[@doi:10.1186/s13059-020-1926-6]

### Highlights

The opportunities arising from single-cell sequencing (sc-seq) are enormous: only now is it possible to re-evaluate hypotheses about differences between pre- defined sample groups at the single-cell level—no matter if such sample groups are disease subtypes, treatment groups, or simply morphologically distinct cell types.

When drawing maps of cell types and states, it is important that they:
- Have a structure that recapitulates both tissue development and tissue organization; 
- Account for continuous cell states in addition to discrete cell types (i.e., reflecting cell state trajectories within cell types and smooth transitions between cell types, as observed in tissue generation); 
- Allow for choosing the level of resolution flexibly (i.e., the map should possibly support zoom-type operations, to let the researcher choose the desired level of granularity with respect to cell types and states conveniently, ranging from whole organisms via tissues to cell populations and cellular subtypes); 
- Include biological and functional annotation wherever available and helpful in the intended functional context

The increase in the number of single cells analyzed per experiment translates into more data points being gener- ated, requiring methods to scale rapidly.

The vast majority of differential expression detection methods assume that the groups of cells to be compared are known in advance (e.g., experimental conditions or cell types). However, current analysis pipelines typically rely on clustering or cell type assignment to identify such groups.

Classifying cells into cell types or states is essential for many secondary analyses. As an example, consider study- ing and classifying how expression within a cell type varies across different biological conditions.

To put the results of such studies on a map, reliable reference systems with a res- olution down to cell states are required—and depending on the research question at hand, even intermediate transition states might be of interest (see “Varying levels of resolution”).

Challenge X: Integration of single-cell data across samples, experiments, and types of measurement.

Depending on the actual research question, such experiments can be different time points, tissues, or organisms. For their integration, we need flexible but rigorous statistical and computational frameworks.

All of these approaches are affected by
- the varying resolution lev- els that are of interest depending on the research question at hand
- the uncertainty of any measurements and how to quantify them for and during the analyses 
- the scaling of single-cell methodology to more cells and more features measured at once 

Batch effects are further aggravated when integrating across multiple experiments, possibly run in differ- ent experimental centers with similar but distinct setups.

Even if standards have been successfully established and known batches accounted for, additional validation of, for exam- ple, assignments of cells to types and states may be required. Eventually, an increase in generality will sup- port the construction of reference systems, such as a cell atlas, the existence of which can support decisive speed- ups when classifying cells or cell states in subsequent experiments.

An exit strategy to this problem is to analyze a population of cells that is homogeneous in terms of some cell type or state, tak- ing different measurement types in different single cells. After collecting different measurement types in different single cells, one needs to combine the data in a way that is biologically meaningful.




## A comparison of automatic cell identification methods for single-cell RNA sequencing data
[@doi:10.1186/s13059-019-1795-z]
### Highlights
Here, we benchmarked 22 classification methods that automatically assign cell identities including single- cell-specific and general-purpose classifiers. The performance of the methods is evaluated using 27 publicly available single-cell RNA sequencing datasets of different sizes, technologies, species, and levels of complexity

We provide a Snakemake workflow to facilitate the benchmarking and to support the extension of new methods and new datasets.

manual annotations, which are often not based on stan- dardized ontologies of cell labels, are not reproducible across different experiments within and across research groups.

Here, we benchmarked 22 classification methods to automatically assign cell identities including single-cell- specific and general-purpose classifiers.

Classifiers were di- vided into two categories:
 (1) supervised methods which require a training dataset labeled with the corresponding cell populations in order to train the classifier or
 (2) prior-knowledge methods, for which either a marker gene file is required as an input or a pretrained classifier for specific cell populations is provided

 PanglaoDB [39] and CellMarker [40]) often provide different markers for the same population. For example, CellMarker provides 33 marker genes for B cells, while PanglaoDB provides 110 markers, with only 11 marker genes overlap between the two databases.

 PanglaoDB [39] and CellMarker [40]) often provide different markers for the same population. For example, CellMarker provides 33 marker genes for B cells, while PanglaoDB provides 110 markers, with only 11 marker genes overlap between the two databases.

 The cell population annotation for all datasets was provided with the data, except the Zheng 68K dataset, for which we obtained the cell population annotation from https://github.com/10XGenomics/single-cell-3prime-paper/ tree/master/pbmc68k_analysis. These annotations were used as a “ground truth” during the evaluation of the cell population predictions obtained from the classifica- tion methods.

 
### Comments


## scMontage: Fast and Robust Gene Expression Similarity Search 2 for Massive Single-cell Data
[@doi:10.1101/2020.08.30.271395]
### Highlights

renovated gene expression similarity search server, which 46 is developed for analyzing massive-scale scRNA-seq data, based on the SHOGoiN human cell type 47 database

After selecting the database by specifying the organism and the platform, the user can limit the genes for calculation to particular types according to Gene Ontology [7]

The scMontage basically runs on Spearman's rank correlation coefficient as a similarity metric of gene  expression profiles.

The scMontage server currently provides 5,035 single-cell transcriptome data (1,424 human and 3,611 mouse cell samples on 23 August 2018) whose cell types are available by original submitters.


### Comments
https://scmontage.stemcellinformatics.org



## Current best practices in single-cell RNA-seq analysis: a tutorial
[@doi:10.15252/msb.20188746]
### Highlights

The resulting read or count matrices have the dimension number of barcodes x number of tran- scripts. The term “barcode” is used here instead of “cell” as all reads assigned to the same barcode may not correspond to reads from the same cell. A barcode may mistakenly tag multiple cells (doublet) or may not tag any cells (empty droplet/well).

On a gene level, clustered data are analysed by finding the gene signatures of each cluster. These so-called marker genes characterize the cluster and are used to annotate it with a meaningful biological label. This label represents the identity of cells within the cluster.
While it may be tempting to assume that the clusters detected in
single-cell data represent cell types, there are several axes of variation that determine cellular identity

Firstly, it is not always clear what constitutes a cell type. 

For example, while “T cells” may be a satisfactory label of a cell type to some, others may look for T-cell subtypes within a dataset and distinguish between CD4+ and CD8+ T cells.

Furthermore, cells of the same cell type in different states may be detected in separate clusters. 

For the above reasons, it is best to use the term “cell identities” rather than “cell types”. 

Before clustering and annotating clusters, the user must decide which level of annotation detail, and thus which cluster resolution, is of interest. 

Identifying and annotating clusters relies on using external sources of information describing the expected expression profiles of individual cell identities.

In the absence of a relevant reference database, cell identities can be annotated by comparing data-derived marker genes with marker genes from the literature or by directly visualizing the expression values of literature-derived marker genes.

It should be noted that the latter method constrains the user to the classical understanding of cell types derived from bulk expression studies, rather than cell identities.

Furthermore, it has been shown that commonly used cell surface markers are limited in their ability to define cell identities (Tabula Muris Consortium et al, 2018). 

for large datasets that contain many clusters, the current best practice is a combination of both approaches. In the interest of speed, automated cell-identity annotation can be used to coarsely label cells and identify where subclustering may be needed.

Note that marker genes for the same cell-identity cluster may differ between datasets purely due to dataset cell type and state compositions.
• If relevant reference atlases exist, we recommend using automated cluster annotation combined with data-derived marker-gene-based manual annotation to annotate clusters.

Metastable states Cell-level analysis of trajectories investigates cellular densities across pseudotime. Assuming that cells were sampled in an unbiased manner, dense regions along a trajectory indicate preferred transcriptomic states. When interpreting the trajectory as a temporal process, these dense regions may represent metastable states in, for example, devel- opment (Haghverdi et al, 2016). We can find these metastable states by plotting histograms of the pseudotime coordinate (Fig 7C).


### Comments


## Revealing the vectors of cellular identity with single-cell genomics
[@doi:10.1038/nbt.3711]
### Highlights

Emerging computational analysis methods, especially in single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), have already begun to reveal, in a data-driven way, the diverse simultaneous facets of a cell’s identity, from discrete cell types to continuous dynamic transitions and spatial locations. These developments will eventually allow a cell to be represented as a superposition of ‘basis vectors’, each determining a different (but possibly dependent) aspect of cellular organization and function.

To understand a cell—the basic unit of life—we must determine the multiple factors that shape its identity. These include its position in a taxonomy of cell types, the progress of multiple time-dependent processes that take place simultaneously, the cell’s response to signals from its local environment, and the precise location and neighborhood in which it resides.

By decomposing this profile to its separate components, it should be possible to determine, in a data-driven way, the specific physiological and molecular features of each of these factors, without relying on prior definitions, hypotheses, or markers.

Second, construction of a comprehensive atlas of all human cell types and sub-types—including their activity states, dynamic transitions, physical locations, and lineage relationships through development—has become a tangible goal.

We highlight key current methods that can characterize the diverse factors involved in determining cellular identity, including cell type (with cell types forming a hierarchical taxonomy), continuous phenotypes, temporal progression (on linear, bifurcating, or cyclic trajectories), and spatial position in the tissue

We define a cell’s identity as the outcome of the instantaneous intersection of all factors that affect it.

We refer to the more permanent aspects in a cell’s identity as its type (e.g., a hepatocyte typically cannot turn into a neuron) and to the more transient elements as its state. 

Cell types are often organized in a hierarchical taxonomy, as types may be further divided into finer subtypes; such taxonomies are often related to a cell fate map, reflecting key steps in differentiation.

Cell states arise transiently during time-dependent processes, either in a temporal progression that is unidirectional (e.g., during differentiation, or following an environmental stimulus) or in a state vacillation that is not necessarily unidirectional and in which the cell may return to the origin state.

Vacillating processes can be oscillatory (e.g., cell-cycle or circadian rhythm) or can transition between states with no predefined order (e.g., due to stochastic, or environmentally controlled, molecular events). 

These time-dependent processes may occur transiently within a stable cell type (as in a transient environmental response), or may lead to a new, distinct type (as in differentiation). 

A cell’s identity is also affected by its spatial context, which includes the cell’s absolute location, defined as its position in the tissue (e.g., the location of a cell along the dorsal–ventral axis during embryo development determines its exposure to a morphogen gradient), and the cell’s neighborhood, or the identity of neighboring cells.

The cell’s identity is manifested in its molecular contents. 

Genomic experiments measure these in molecular profiles, and computational methods infer information on the cell’s identity from the measured molecular profiles. We refer to this as inferring facets of the cell’s identity, or inferring factors that created the cell’s identity, to stress that none describes it fully, but each is an important, distinguishable aspect.

By analogy, we relate the biological factors that shape a cell’s identity to basis vectors that span a space of cell identities.

In particular, basis vectors in algebra are defined to be independent of each other, but facets of a cell’s identity that we would like to distinguish and identify separately—such as its type, location, and state—may be largely dependent on one another. For example, the spatial position of a cell in a solid organ is a fixed element of its identity that is usually distinguished from its ‘type’ but is nevertheless not independent of cell type.


In particular, basis vectors in algebra are defined to be independent of each other, but facets of a cell’s identity that we would like to distinguish and identify separately—such as its type, location, and state—may be largely dependent on one another. For example, the spatial position of a cell in a solid organ is a fixed element of its identity that is usually distinguished from its ‘type’ but is nevertheless not independent of cell type.


Even within a type, cells may span a continuous range of functional phenotypes (e.g., T cells of a single type, but with a range of inflammatory versus regulatory phenotypes, see N.Y., A.R. and colleagues1). While each such facet of a cell’s identity is often considered separately, they are at least partly interdependent.
Cataloging sources of biological variation, and understanding how they combine to determine a cell’s identity, is an integral task in the compilation of a human cell atlas. This will reopen definitions of a cell’s type and will allow a more sophisticated view of a cell, not only as an instance of a predefined type, but rather as the sum of the biological factors that shaped it.

Classification of cells into discrete types from single-cell profiles is a problem of unsupervised clustering in high dimensions. The key, inter-related challenges include 
(1) adapting methods to the exponentially increasing scale of single-cell data;
(2) ensuring that the resulting classification is reproducible across experiments and platforms; 
(3) finding the proper granularity and detecting hierarchies of types and subtypes where they exist, especially when cell type frequency varies by multiple orders of magnitude from the most abundant to the rarest sub-type; 
(4) distilling molecular markers and signatures to characterize each cell type and/or cluster; 
(5) matching the resulting classes to legacy knowledge, and using semi-supervised methods where such knowledge exists; and 
(6) visualizing, sharing, and comparing classifications. 
Solutions to many of these challenges are only beginning to emerge.

Categorization of cells into discrete types is a powerful abstraction and has been the focus of much of the single-cell genomic research thus far4,30,34,36,118,120,96–100

Finally, even when a cell population partitions into discrete types, hybrid cells—single cells that are a mix of two or more types—may be observed97,99 (we refer here to true biological hybrids, in contrast to false hybrids resulting from doublets, as discussed above)

By combining single- cell tissue genomics with computational models for circuits that relate cells to each other in space and time, from their molecular connections and up to their functional impacts, we can build an integrated understanding of how cells fulfill their function in health and disease.


### Comments
"This will reopen definitions of a cell’s type and will allow a more sophisticated view of a cell, not only as an instance of a predefined type, but rather as the sum of the biological factors that shaped it."
--> Amazing!

 

## CellO: Comprehensive and hierarchical cell type classification of human cells with the Cell Ontology
[@doi:10.1101/634097]
### Highlights

CellO, a tool for hierarchically classifying cell type from single-cell RNA-seq data against the graph-structured Cell Ontology.
CellO Viewer, for exploring cell type-specific signatures across the Cell Ontology

Second, many existing methods use flat-classification. Flat classification suffers from the possibility that predictions are logically inconsistent with the hierarchy of cell types. Specifically, for a given query, a flat classifier may output a probability for a cell type that is larger than the classifier's output for its parent cell type in the hierarchy.

Garnett (Pliner et al., 2019 ) utilizes a hierarchy of cell types; however, these hierarchies must be pre-specified by the user. Furthermore, Garnett requires that each cell within the hierarchy be associated with a set of marker genes. To the best of our knowledge, the only method that utilizes the graph-structure of an ontology for the task at hand is URSA (Lee et al., 2013) , which classifies gene expression profiles against the BRENDA Tissue Ontology (Gremse et al., 2011) .

We thus avoid the circularity in using ground truth cell type labels determined by gene expression (via the expression of cell type-specific marker genes) as are often provided in scRNA-seq datasets.

We therefore curated a novel dataset from the SRA consisting of healthy, untreated, primary cells. To do so efficiently, we leveraged the annotations provided by the MetaSRA project (Bernstein et al., 2017) which includes sample-specific information including cell type, disease-state, and sample type.

The hierarchical classification task is inherently a multi-label classification task where each input sample (i.e. cell) is mapped to a set of output labels (i.e. cell types). Hierarchical classification extends multi-label classification by further requiring that the output labels are consistent with the labels’ DAG.

we first cluster single-cell data using the Leiden community-detection algorithm (Traag et al., 2019) using the default resolution parameter of 1.0, as implemented in the Scanpy Python package (Wolf et al., 2018) , and then compute each cluster’s mean expression profile. The mean expression profiles are less sparse than those of the individual cells and thus better resemble the bulk RNA-seq data on which the algorithms were trained. CellO first classifies each cluster based on its mean expression profile and then assigns each cell to its cluster’s assigned cell types.

--> Argh, that is logically ugly (even if it works)

Algorithm (Traag et al., 2019) using the default resolution parameter of 1.0, as implemented in the Scanpy Python package (Wolf et al., 2018) , and then compute each cluster’s mean expression profile. The mean expression profiles are less sparse than those of the individual cells and thus better resemble the bulk RNA-seq data on which the algorithms were trained. CellO first classifies each cluster based on its mean expression profile and then assigns each cell to its cluster’s assigned cell types.

For each cell, we evaluate a set of binary yes-no decisions for each cell type that result from thresholding the raw output probabilities and enforce each cell to be annotated with only one most-specific cell type.

To enable a comparison between scMatch, SingleR, and CellO, we project the outputs of scMatch and SingleR onto the Cell Ontology in order to evaluate scMatch and SingleR within the hierarchical classification framework. Specifically, for a given cell annotated by one of these methods with some cell type , we also annotate the cell with all ancestors of according to the Cell Ontology.

Although the bulk RNA-seq training data contains samples of both embryonic cells and cells of various neural cell types, it does not contain any sample labeled as both neural cell and embryonic cell. Despite this discrepancy, CellO was able to annotate these cells with reasonable cell type labels ( Figure 5B, S2C ). We note that the microglial cells were annotated as phagocytes, which are an ancestral term to microglial cells in the Cell Ontology. Similarly, CellO annotated the glial cells as neuron associated cells. These examples again highlight CellO’s ability to annotate cells with a term higher in the ontology DAG when it is unsure about a cell’s more-specific cell type.

We provide a Python package for running CellO, using either IR or CLR, on a user-provided gene expression matrix ( https://github.com/deweylab/CellO ).

To enable their interpretation, we present a web-based tool, the CellO Viewer, for exploring these discriminative genes uncovered by the models
( https://uwgraphics.github.io/CellOViewer/ ).

We found that across diverse cell types, many known cell type-specific marker genes were recovered by the CellO models and are presented by the CellO Viewer. For example, CD3D, CD3E, and CD3G, which are canonical markers for T cells, were all present within the top ten genes ranked according to the magnitude of their coefficients within the logistic binary regression model used for distinguishing T cells from all other cell types.

Finally, we expect the performance of hierarchical classifiers to improve as both more data is collected and as the Cell Ontology is expanded. Most importantly, we expect the calibration of the classifiers to improve as more training data becomes available for each cell type. More data will be collected both as data is continually added to the SRA and as improvements are made to the SRA's metadata thereby allowing retrieval of previously undiscovered primary cell samples

### Comments
flat-classification
--> I like this comment

# Experimental single-cell research 

## Single-cell RNA-seq reveals new types ofhuman blood dendritic cells, monocytes, and progenitors
[@doi:10.1126/science.aah4573]
### Highlights

Atlas of human blood dendritic cells and monocytes

Dendritic cells (DCs) and monocytes consist of multiple specialized sub- types that play a central role in pathogen sensing, phagocytosis, and antigen presentation. However, their identities and interrelationships are not fully understood, as these populations have historically been definedbyacombination of morphology, physical properties, localiza- tion, functions, developmental origins, and expression ofa restricted set of surface markers.


Single-cell RNA sequencing of~2400cells isolated from healthy blood donors and enriched for HLA-DR+ lineage− cells

six DC subtypes
four monocyte subtypes, and thus revise the taxonomy of these cells

DC subset, representing 2 to 3% of the DC populations across all __10 donors__ tested, characterized by the expression ofAXL, SIGLEC1, and SIGLEC6 antigens, named AS DCs.

This split is further reflected through AS DC gene expression signatures spanning aspectrumbetween cDC-like andpDC- like gene sets. Although AS DCs share prop- erties with pDCs, they more potently activate T cells. This discovery led us to reclassify pDCs as the originally described “natural interferon- producing cells (IPCs)” with weaker T cell pro- liferation induction ability.

A new subdivision within the CD1C+ DC subset: one defined by a major histocompatibility complex class II–like gene set andonebyaCD14+ monocyte–like prominent gene set


The discovery of AS DCs withinthe traditionally definedpDCpopulation explains manyofthe cDC properties previously assigned to pDCs, highlighting the need to re- visit the definition of pDCs


it is unclear how many DC subtypes exist, how they are related to each other, and how they differ from other mononuclear phagocytes.

In the blood, DC subtypes include CD11C+ con- ventional DCs (cDCs), consisting of either CD141+ or CD1C+ cells, and plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs), consisting of CD123+ cells.


we developed an experimental and computational strategy to 
(i) perform single-cell RNA sequencing on DCs and monocytes derived from a single healthy individual;
(ii) identify clusters of cells that are similar to each other; 
(iii) find discriminative markers per cluster; 
(iv) prospectively isolate cells corresponding to key clusters using newly identified surface markers; 
(v) validate the identity of the sorted cells using scRNA-seq; (vi) confirm the existence of these cell types in up to 10 independent healthy individuals; and 
(vii) perform functional analyses for selected cell types.
Single-cell

Ficoll-enriched cells that were isolated by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) (Fig. 1A) excluding cells expressing markers of B, T, and NK cells (6).

For DCs, we sampled LIN–HLA-DR+CD14– cells across the CD11C+ fraction (to enrich for CD141+ and CD1C+ cDCs) and the CD11C– fraction (to enrich for CD123+ pDCs)

deep scRNA-seq using a modified Smart-Seq2 protocol

LIN–HLA- DR+CD14– population

We defined six cell clusters within the LIN–HLA- DR+CD14– population using unsupervised analy- sis that did not rely on known markers of DCs

Up to five top discriminators are listed next to each cluster; number in brackets refers to AUC value.

Axl (1.00)
SIGLEC6 + (0.97)

Several markers commonly used to identify pDCs (e.g., IL3RA/CD123, CLEC4C/CD303) were also expressed in the population defined by the DC5 cluster, leading us to define a new combination of markers that distinguish pDCs from the DC5 population. 

Discovering monocyte subsets and their relationships to DC subsets. The two largest clusters, Mono1 and Mono2, contained the CD14++CD16– (“classical”) and CD14+CD16++ (“nonclassical”) monocytes, respectively

Population emerged from the unbiased cluster analysis (cluster DC5; Fig. 1), definedbycoexpressionofuniquemarkers (e.g., AXL, SIGLEC1, SIGLEC6,and CD22/SIGLEC2) (Fig. 4A, fig. S5A, and tables S1 and S2). Flow cytometry analysis of peripheral blood mono- nuclear cells (PBMCs) from 10 independent do- nors confirmed the existence of AXL+SIGLEC6+ cells (“AS DCs”)

AS DCs exhibited a spectrum of states based on gene expression (Fig. 4D) defined by cells enriched for a pDC-like signature (e.g., IL3RA, IGJ, NRP1, MZB1) and cells enriched for a cDC- like signature (IFI30, ITGAX, LY86, GLIPR2, FGR, LYZ, ENTPD1).

Taken to- gether, our data suggest that AXL+SIGLEC6+ DCs are related but not identical to cDCs or pDCs.

When we seeded cultures with pDCs and CD1C+ and CLEC9A+ DCs, we found that they generally retained the same phenotype throughout the differentiation assay. After 7 days in culture, we observed cells with high levels of CD1C (frequency 40 to 50%, n =6 donors) and rare cells with surface CLEC9A and CADM1 (0.5 to 0.8%) expression (Fig. 6F)

Cells differentiated from AS DCs did not express BATF3 (a transcription factor required for terminal differentiation of CLEC9A+ DCs), CADM1,or XCR1, which are key CLEC9A+ DC discriminative markers (table
 
We found that AS DCs did not divide during the transition into CD1C+ DCs.

We leveraged our human DC atlas to compare pathogenic cells driving blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN), a rare and ag- gressive hematological malignancy previously known as NK cell leukemia/lymphoma.

DCs and monocytes are defined according to a combination of molecular markers, functional properties, and ontogeny (39). However, it remains unclearwhether the expression ofexistingmarkers tracks with themore complex internal states of cells.

Previous studies classified human blood DCs into one pDC and twocDC populations. Our study identifies six DC populations.

AS DCs most closely resemble CD1C+ cDCs in basic functional properties and expres- sion signatures, they are likely to have distinct functions because they localize to the T cell zone of tonsils and express several lectins, which rec- ognize diverse glycans, andAXL,which interacts with apoptotic cells and Zika virus


Furthermore, a murine study identified nonca- nonical CX3CR1+CD8a+ cDCs (nc-cDCs), which ex- press pDC and cDC signatures (e.g., CX3CR1, CD11c, and MHCII), do not produce IFN-a,and activate T cell proliferation (47, 48). Interestingly, pDCs and nc-cDCs require E2-2/TCF4 to develop, and reduced levels ofE2-2 lead to higher ID2 and expression of cDC genes (18, 47, 48). Consistent with this finding, we observed E2-2/TCF4 ex- pression in human pDCs (Fig. 5A), with decreas- ing levels of E2-2/TCF4 and increasing levels of ID2 as AS DCs transition to CD1C+ DCs (fig. S5, C to F). These findings suggest that AS DCs are similar to human CD2hi pDCs andmurine nc-cDCs.

More generally, our use of the DC atlas to understand BPDCN cells illustrates how single-cell analysis can pin- point relationships of diseased cells to healthy cells.

Nonetheless, some DC/monocyte subtypes were likely missed because they do not express MHC class II at rest, can onlybe defined bynon-RNAmolecules, are distinguished by low-abundance transcripts, or are onlypresent during inflammation, disease, or within tissues. To build a comprehensive im- mune cell atlas, future studies will need to address these challenges as well as localize these cell types within lymphoid and nonlymphoid tissues.


Healthy donors were recruited from the Boston-based PhenoGenetic project, a resource of healthysubjectsthatare recontactablebygeno- type (57), and the Newcastle community. Individ- uals were excluded if they had a history ofcancer, allergies, inflammatory disease, autoimmune dis- ease, chronic metabolic disorders, or infectious disorders. All healthy donors were nonsmokers, had a normal BMI and normal blood pressure, and were between 25 and 40 years of age.




### Comments




## Single-cell sequencing of the human midbrain reveals glial activation and a neuronal state specific to Parkinson’s disease 
[@doi:10.1101/2020.09.28.20202812]
### Highlights

profiled >41,000 single-nuclei transcriptomes of postmortem midbrain tissue from 6 idiopathic PD (IPD) patients and 5 matched controls.

IPD-microglia revealed a specific pro-inflammatory trajectory. Finally, we discovered a neuronal cell cluster exclusively present in IPD midbrains characterized by CADPS2 overexpression and a high proportion of cycling cells.

We performed snRNA-seq of postmortem adult human midbrain tissue of IPD patients and age-matched healthy controls.

Postmortem intervals, IPD ~22, and controls ~16 hours

We found that this overall cluster structure was mostly driven by cell-type identity and the inter-sample variability

Using this corrected PCA embedding and the unsupervised and network-based Louvain clustering approach, we found that the human midbrain comprises 12 major cell types.

- Oligodendrocytes, the most abundant cell-type in the midbrain ( Fig. 1F ), are characterized by the expression of MOBP 10
- oligodendrocyte precursors cells (OPCs) highly express VCAN 11
-  Expression of AQP4 is characteristic of astrocytes 12
- FOXJ1 of ependymal cells 13
- CD74 in microglia 
- CLDN5 in endothelial cells 15 , 16
- PDGFRB in pericytes 
- excitatory ( SLC17A6 ) 
- inhibitory ( GAD2 ) 
- GABAergic ( GAD2 / GRIK1 ) 
- dopaminergic neurons( TH )

We also discovered a neuronal cluster of 120 cells, which we could not annotate, characterized by high expression of CADPS2 (CADPS2 high
cells) ( Fig. 1E-F, fig. S1C ). These cells almost exclusively originated from IPD patients (IPD, 98.4%; control, 1.6%) (Fig. 1G)

We labeled microglia and astrocytes with antibodies against their marker proteins IBA1 and GFAP, respectively.

. We labeled microglia and astrocytes with antibodies against their marker proteins IBA1 and GFAP, respectively

To validate DaN degeneration in the IPD tissue with an independent approach, we quantified the area of MAP2+/TH+/NM+ and MAP2+/TH-/NM+ neurons.

We recovered the astrocyte activation trajectory based on the main cell types comprising VAV3 high, LRRC4C high , and CD44/S100A6 high subpopulations

We then focused on deciphering the identity of the CADPS2 high cells, which were almost exclusively detected
in the IPD patients ( Fig. 4A ). This cell population pseudo-bulk-transcriptome clusters together with the neuronal cell types, excitatory, inhibitory, GABAergic, and DaNs ( fig. S1I ). In accordance with this global transcriptome similarity, CADPS2 high
cells positively express the neuronal marker genes MAP2 and SCN2A
( Fig. 4B ). Performing immunofluorescence labeling with antibodies for CADPS2, MAP2, and TH, we confirmed the existence of a neuronal cell population with an IPD-specific increase of CADPS2 expression in the SN ( Fig. 4C, E )

when we previously applied scRNA-seq to
.
midbrain organoids, the detected number of TH-positive neurons was well below the actual DaN count

--> what is, then, a DaN?

Finally, we discovered a new disease-specific cell state that is defined by translational similarity to midbrain DaNs but with low TH levels and high CADPS2 expression.

Immunofluorescence analysis revealed that CADPS2 high neurons are localized to the SN and that they harbour neuromelanin deposits.

In addition to high levels of CADPS2 , the IPD-specific neuronal population was characterized by elevated TIAM1 expression.

We discovered a novel neuronal cell state that was almost exclusively identified in IPD midbrain tissue.

The top marker genes were used to assign cell-type annotations manually for each cell cluster. We compared the cell types by correlating their pseudo bulk profiles.


### Comments



### Comments




## Cell types in the mouse cortex and hippocampus revealed by single-cell RNA-seq
[@doi:10.1126/science.aaa1934]
### Highlights

Here, we have used large-scale  RNA-seq to classify cells in the mouse somatosensory cortex and hippocampal CA1 region. We found 47 molecularly distinct subclasses,
on SPIN (13), which revealed comprising all known major cell types in the cortex

S1 pyramidal cells were marked by Tbr1
oligodendrocytes by Hapln2 (and so on)

Every subclass was detected in multiple mice (fig. S1K), arguing that cell identity was preserved across these genetically outbred (CD-1) animals.

We identified seven subclasses of S1 pyramidal cells (Fig.2A and figs. S6A and S7), which were largely layer-specific

Astrocytes formed two subclasses (Fig. 3A and fig. S9A), distinguished by differential expression of Gfap (type 1) and Mfge8 (type 2). 

We identified two types of immune cells: microglia (the tissue-resident macrophages of the brain) and perivascular macrophages.
Although closely related, these cell types have distinct developmental origin (19).

Both expressed brain macrophage markers Aif1 and Cx3cr1, while perivascular macrophages were distinguished by expression of Mrc1 and Lyve1, characteristic of pro-angiogenic perivascular type 2 macrophages (20). 

Immunohistochemistry for the corresponding proteins confirmed that microglia (AIF1+/LYVE1-/MRC1-) had a classical, ramified morphology and were lo-
cated throughout the cortex (Fig. 3, D and E). 

In contrast, perivascular macrophages (AIF+/LYVE1+/MRC1+) were located only along vessels and showed an ameboid morphology.

Across the full set of cell types, transcription factors formed a complex, layered regu- latory code, suggesting a plausible mechanism for
the maintenance of adult differentiated cell types.

--> By using an explicit definition, you can really study type maintenance.


### Comments



## Highly Parallel Genome-wide Expression Profiling of Individual Cells Using Nanoliter Droplets
[@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2015.05.002]
### Highlights

We analyzed transcriptomes from 44,808 mouse retinal cells and identified 39 transcription- ally distinct cell populations, creating a molec- ular atlas of gene expression for known retinal cell classes
our knowledge of cellular diversity is incomplete; for example, the cell-type complexity of the brain is unknown and widely debated

Wethen applied it to a com- plex neural tissue, mouse retina, and from 44,808 cell profiles identified 39 distinct populations, each corresponding to one or a group of closely related cell types.



### Comments


## Single-cell transcriptomics of 20 mouse organs creates a Tabula Muris
[@doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0590-4]
### Highlights

Direct and controlled comparison of gene expression in cell types that are shared between tissues, such as T lymphocytes and endothelial cells from different anatomical locations.
these data are by no means a complete representation of all mouse organs and cell types, they provide a first draft attempt to create an organism-wide representation of cellular diversity

cluster-specific gene expression of known markers and genes that are differentially expressed between clusters to assign cell-type annotations to each cluster (Extended Data Figs. 1, 2, Supplementary Table 1)

Cell type descriptions and defining genes for each organ are available in the Supplementary Information. For each cluster, we provide annota- tions in the controlled vocabulary of the cell ontology19 to facilitate interexperiment comparisons

Cluster co-membership alone, however, is insufficient to conclude that two cell populations from different organs represent the same or similar cell types;

ten thymus cells in cluster 3 (composed of 2,379 cells) are annotated as ‘leukocytes’, but they express Pecam1, which is an endothelial marker. This is a predictable artefact of the annotation scheme: because entire clusters, rather than individual cells, were annotated in each organ, a sufficiently rare cell type that was algorithmically grouped with a more populous cell type will be mis- annotated

We investigated how transcription factors contribute to cell-type identity by clustering averaged gene-expression profiles for each cell type using only the 1,016 transcription factors expressed in our dataset.

136 transcription factors are needed to simultaneously define all cell types across all organs
--> bold statement
### Comments



## Comprehensive single-cell transcriptional profiling ofa multicellular organism
[@doi:10.1126/science.aam8940]

### Highlights
We defined consensus expression profiles for 27 cell types and recovered rare neuronal cell types corresponding to as few as one or two cells in the L2 worm.

Whole-animal chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing data to deconvolve the cell type–specific effects of transcription factors.

The expression levels of mRNA species are linked to cellular function and therefore can be used to classify cell types (2–10) and order cell states (11).

C. elegans istheonlymulticellular orga- nismfor which all cells and cell types are defined, as is its entire developmental lineage (26, 27)

--> All cell types are defined! I wonder what bases this conclusion. 

We pooled ~150,000 larvae synchronized at the L2 stage and dissociated them into single-cell suspensions.

Semi-supervised clustering analysis segregated the cells into 29 distinct groups.

We identified genes that were expressed specifically in a single cluster, and, by comparing those genes to expression patterns reported in the literature, assigned the clusters to cell types. Twenty-six cell types were represented in the 29 clusters: Nineteen represented exactly one literature-defined cell type, seven contained multiple distinct cell types, two contained cells of a specific cell type but had abnormally low UMI counts, and one could not be readily assigned

de- spite the fact that sci-RNA-seq captures a minor- ity of transcripts in each cell, our “oversampling” of the cellular composition of the organism en- abled us to construct representative expression profiles for individual cell types (Fig.

By morphological criteria, the 302 neurons of the worm are classified into 118 distinct types (36), and fromthe database ofreporter transgene expression patterns, most of these are postulated to have unique molecular signatures (37).

we constructed regularized regression models to predict each gene’s expression as a function of the TF ChIP peaks present in its promoter.

We re- stricted a cell type’s model to those TFs that were detectably expressed within it [>10 tran- scripts per million (TPM)], increasing the pro- portion of TF–cell type associations that are likely to reflect causal gene regulation.

With sci-RNA-seq, we generated a catalog of single-cell transcriptomes with >50-fold “shot- gun” cellular coverage of the L2 C. elegans soma. We detected 18 non-neuronal cell types and many neuronal cell types, which we grouped into either 10 broad classes or 40 fine-grained clus- ters from an unsupervised analysis, highlighting the potential of an organism’s gene regulatory programs to be enacted at a fine-grained level.

To this end, we have created a website to facil- itate the further annotation of these data by the community (http://atlas.gs.washington.edu)

### Comments

# Template 

## Broad transcriptional dysregulation of brain and choroid plexus cell types with COVID-19
[@doi:10.1101/2020.10.22.349415]
### Highlights

We find that all major cortex parenchymal and choroid plexus cell types are affected transcriptionally with COVID-19.
Missing so far is an unbiased view of the molecular and cellular perturbations across brain cell types in COVID-19 patients.

https://twc-stanford.shinyapps.io/scRNA_Brain_COVID19

To begin, we generated 23,626 single-nuclei gene expression profiles from the medial frontal cortex (4 non-viral, 4 COVID-19, 1 influenza)—and detected a median of 1,486 genes per nucleus
clustering of nuclear profiles to identify and annotate 8 cell types.

excitatory neurons (e.g., marked by CBLN2 and NRGN), inhibitory neurons (GAD1), astrocytes (AQP4), oligodendrocytes (MBP and ST18), microglia (DOCK8), oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (VCAN), maturing neurons (DACH1), and endothelial cells (LEPR)—though this latter 82 population also contains mixed markers for vascular mural pericytes and smooth muscle cells, 83 as in prior reports.

Overall, the cell type identities, markers, and proportions match prior 84 snRNA-seq data from adult human cortex

2,194 unique differentially expressed genes (DEGs) that implicated all major cell types (Extended Data Table 3).

The vast majority of
93 DEGs were perturbed in only a single cell type (~84%, Fig. 1e-f, Extended Data Fig. 5a), further indicating a cell type-specific CNS response to COVID-19.

conventional brain snRNA-seq preparation methods nearly universally deplete high-quality brain vascular nuclei from endothelial cells, pericytes, smooth muscle cells, and fibroblasts for currently unknown reasons.

We next sought to identify the neuronal subtypes affected in COVID-19.

Sequencing of 47,678 nuclei in both frontal cortex and choroid plexus along with IHC detection of SARS-CoV-2 in brain-barrier cells.

Extended Data Figure 4. Markers for annotating parenchymal cells in the human choroid plexus.
Validation of cell type annotations using established cell type-specific markers. Subsets of epithelial cells are marked by high expression of specific markers not previously described in mice. Violin plots are centered around the median, with their shape representing cell distribution
### Comments

# Template 

## Title
[citation]
### Highlights



### Comments