# Articles about species definition

## Describing Species - Judith Winston
[@doi:10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004]

### Highlights

#### Chapter 1. Introduction

The first step in wisdom is to know the things themselves; this notion consists in having the true idea ofthe object; objects are distinguishedandknown by their methodical classification and appropriate naming; therefore Classification andNaming will be the foundation of our Science. –Linnaeus

The number of known species of eukaryotic organisms is currently estimated to be about 1.4 million (Lean et al. 1990; Systematics Agenda 2000 1994).It seems reasonable to suppose that most of Earth’s species have been described. But this is far from true.

Figure 1.1 New equipment and new habitats yield new species.

Small mammals are still discovered fairly often; they are mostly rodents such as the Panay cloudrunner, Crateromys heaneyi (Gonzales and Kennedy 1996).

Taxonomy is a subdivision ofsystematics, consisting of three associated activities: identification (referring a speci- men to a previously classified and named group), classification (ordering organisms into groups based on perceived similarities or differences), and nomenclature (naming groups of organisms according to rules developed for the process)

A species becomes known in the scientific sense when a Latin binomial, a name consisting of two parts (a genus term and a species term), and a description are published in the scientific literature, according to the rules of botanical (The International Code of Botanical Nomenclature, ICBN) or zoological (The International Code of Zoological Nomenclature, ICZN) nomenclature. Although they are written in legal language, there is no agency to enforce these codes; there is only the consensus of biologists to observe and accept them (Jeffrey 1989)

new species are found and described by professional systematic biologists and paleontologists in the course of their research, as they study specimens generated by their own field work or by expe- ditions or surveys made by others and preserved in museum collections.

In summary, most biologists who find a new species, whether living or fossil, must describe it themselves. This bookaims to explain the procedure by which scientists who find a new species in the course of their research can perform the necessary background studies and write a publishable description of that species.

I began this book at the request ofsome ecologist colleagues who were finding undescribed species in the course of their research and wanted to know what steps they should take to get those species named.

I anticipate grumbling from a few ofmy colleagues who seem to feel that systematics should remain an esoteric pursuit. They are convinced that if “amateurs” acquire the information they need to publish taxonomic papers, the result will be a horrendous proliferation of poorly delimited species and a great increase in confusion in the literature. However, although following established taxonomic procedure may be time-consuming and occasionally tedious, it is not especially difficult.

#### Chapter 2. Biological Nomenclature
Biologic categorization is one ofthe most conspicuous aspects ofsuccessful behavior, not only ofman, but ofall animals, in
meetingthe requirements for survivalin a complex environment. –Dunn and Davidson (1968:75)


We are all taxonomists. Pattern seeking and the urge to classify our environment are part of our biology.

The importance of spatial intelligence in taxonomy might explain why its mastery has often been likened to the mastery ofvisual arts such as painting, in which talent is often shown very early and technical mastery and creative expression continue to develop throughout life.

However, despite ourcommonhuman heritage as taxonomists, most of us, whether students, scientists, or even practicing systematists, have little patience with the nomenclatural aspect of the field. 

Biologists have divided the living world into groups oforganisms, or taxa, which they have arranged in a series of levels, or a taxonomic hierarchy (table 2.1), with the species (chapter 3) as its essential element.

By agreement among biologists, scientific names are assigned or reassigned according to sets of rules called codes of nomenclature.

Far from being written in stone, the present rules are the result of many hard-fought scientific battles over the last 200 years.They represent the best compromise taxonomists have come up with to deal with two diametrically opposing needs: the need to name, to provide each organism with a unique and stable name; and the need to classify, to provide a system of classification that is explanatory and predictive.

Most naturalists of the time wrote in Latin, so the names they used for plants and animals were Latin. But their names were inconsistent and often paragraphs long. Authors of the time expected a name to serve as diagnosis and description, as well as identification (Mayr et al. 1953). Linnaeus is often given the credit for inventing binomial nomenclature, but his real contribution lay in standardizing and simplifying a system already in use

But ifmore relatives turned up, the additional names might be trinomial(e.g., IrismaritimaNorbonensis) or might expand into a whole descriptive phrase or polynomial(e.g., Irisperpusilla saxatilisNorbonensisacaulisferme) (Mayr et al. 1953; Greene 1983). Dealing with names a paragraph long was inconvenient.

Some taxonomists, like Linnaeus himself (1736, 1751), developed their own rules ofprocedure (Schmidt 1952). But none caught on widely, and well before the middle of the nineteenth century

Table 2.2 shows the features shared by the current international codes for botanical and zoological nomenclature. The primary purpose ofboth codes is to provide a unique binomial scientific name for every species of organism. 

Both the ICBN and the ICZN aim to • Ensure a unique scientific name for every taxon. These names must be Latin in form, written in the Latin alphabet, and composed in accordance with the rules of Latin grammar.
• Provide rules for publication of new names and determine whether previously published names are acceptable.
• Ensure adequate documentation and dating of names. • Ensure typification (that each name is linked to a type specimen, specimens, or species).
• By use of types permit names to be assigned to taxa without interfering with scientific freedom to make changes in classifications on the basis of new information and insights.
• Give a chronological starting point to names used (names in publications before the starting date are ignored).
• Provide an administrative system (the International Botanical Congress and its Permanent Nomenclature Committee and the IUBS and its International Commission ofZoological Nomenclature for animals) to ensure and oversee the interpretation and improvement of the codes.

two codes are independent; the same genus name may be used for an animal and for a plant.

Some systematists find the idea of any further compromise offensive and would like to see a completely phylogenetic (cladistic) classification system replace it (Hennig 1981; deQueiroz and Gauthier 1990).



#### Chapter 3. Species and Their Discovery Chapter

There is already too much literature on the “species problem.”

A species can mean a number ofthings biologically, depending on the characteristics of the organisms involved.

It is a different phenomenon in solitary sexually reproducing animals (those most like ourselves, and perhaps for that reason, the most closely studied), than it is in sexually reproducing plants, clonal plants, and clonal or colonial invertebrates, let alone bacteria and viruses.

Numerous models have been proposed. They can be grouped under five main headings (Table 3.1): phenetic, biological, phylogenetic, ecological, and cohesive.

The phenetic species concept is a strictly operational and nonexplanatory concept based only on the observable facts of similarity and dis- continuity

The evolutionary or phylogenetic species concept is favored by many biologists, but has the disadvantage that lineage affiliation cannot be unequivocally proven (without time travel). Another drawback is that this model deals well with speciation by branching (cladogenesis), but not as well with reticulate processes. 

 Phenetic Species Concept

Species are the smallest groups that are consistently and persistently distinct and distinguishable by ordinary means (Cronquist 1978; DuRietz 1930; Sokal 1973; Doyen and Slobodchikoff 1974)

No one of these approaches is completely right or wrong. Instead, the different concepts provide models appropriate for different purposes.

In particular, what is important is whether speciation occurs strictly by branching or cladogenesis (figure 3.1) or whether reticulation is possible.

The biological species concept is defined by reproductive isolation. Species by this definition are groups of “actually or potentially interbreeding natural populations which are reproductively isolated from other groups” (Mayr 1963:19).

about cladogenesis: life is not always neat and logical. For the majority of animals and at least a substantial minority of plants, this assumption mostly seems to be met, and phylogenetic analysis works well. But you must be aware ofits limitations and the potential impact ofthese other phenomena on your study organism

organisms with closed genomes, germ cells become distinct from somatic cells early in development.

in organisms with open genomes, such as plants and certain groups of invertebrates, almost any dividing cell can give rise to reproductive cells, meaning that any external genetic material that survives introduction into their cells has a chance of being passed on.

All organisms contain an array of biological information, some of which is useful in a comparative or taxonomic sense, some of which is useless, and some ofwhich may even be misleading. Quicke (1993:263) defines a taxonomic character as “any physical structure (macroscopic, microscopic or molecular) or behavioral system that can have more than one form (character state), the variation in which potentially provides phylogenetic information.”
Mayr (1969:121) defines a taxonomic character as “any attribute of a member of a taxon by which it differs or may differ from a member of a different taxon.”

Newspecies are often collected in communitystudies, area surveys, and oceanographic sampling in which the primary intent of the project is to describe community diversity or the distribution and abundance ofmajor organisms. In such cases the specimens that cannot be identified to species level are often given numbers or letters to distinguish them as separate taxa when the project results are initially written up for publication. Later they may be described formally as new species, often by collaboration with a taxonomist, and attention called to their status in previous publications.

It would be impossible to list here all the books and articles that deal with populations and species–major topics of evolutionary biology. Those listed here were selected to give different perspectives and opinions.

#### Chapter 4. Establishing Identity: The Literature Search

One reason some taxonomists strongly discourage species description by nonspecialists is that they are aware of the awful mistakes that have been made (by both amateurs and professionals) who rushed into print without stopping to make sure that what they were describing was both new and real.

It may be an individual genetic variant or mutant. It may be a variant produced by growth under unfavorable conditions (e.g., a plant subjected to heavy grazing, an animal stunted by an inadequate food supply).

Especially with plants, it may be a hybrid between two known species. It may have been described so recently that it is not in the book or article you used for identification.

It maybe a known species, but one that has never been described before from the region where you found it. Maybe it is an introduced species, or maybe it is just rare or inconspicuous and was overlooked by earlier workers.

It may indeed represent a completely new species, which must be named and described.

- Where to Find the Taxonomic Literature

- Be sure to allow enough time
- Verify your references.

To finish your literature search, you must learn to read taxonomic de- scriptions, understand the parts of a description, and know why they are included. This topic is covered in depth in chapters 7–15, but is summarized here.

However, there is a common basic structure: a heading that consists of scientific name, name, author, and date, followed by a synonymy (a list of previous references to that species), and then the main body of the description, which may include etymology, diagnosis, taxonomic discussion, ecology, and distribution sections.

Diagnosis. This section gives a brief comparative description of the organism, pointing out how it differs from close relatives (why it is a horse of a different color).

Description. This portion contains the straightforward description of the species (2-year-old, chestnut, 14 hands, etc.). Again, style varies from group to group and publication to publication.

Distribution. In a description of a new species this may just be one locality. For a common or wide-ranging species it may be a long list of localities. If the work is regional in scope (e.g., a flora or a faunal survey) the author may list only its occurrences in the part of the world being studied.

#### Chapter 5. Establishing Identity: Using Museum Collections

Natural history collections are undoubtedly partofmodern biology, andare arguably one ofthe most cost-effective research tools


Biologists are often confused about what taxonomists mean by the word type. Ifyour background is in biology, ecology, or paleontology, you were probably taught a species concept that was biological, in which species were recognized to be (or to have been) a population of reproducing individuals.

Ancient Greek systems of categorization, in which terms were defined on the basis of their similarity to some ideal or _type_.

Without knowledge of the workings of genetics or selection, species were perceived as immutable entities that could be defined by some perfect _type_ and all the specimens that were _typical_ belonged to that species or other category

Types in taxonomy have a very different meaning. They make the system we use for naming organisms stable and objective by tying the published name to an actual specimen or suite of specimens, serving as a reference standard for a taxon


Holotype. The holotype is a single specimen used by an author, either the only specimen he found or one of several found, but the only one designated as a type. When people talk about the type, they are referring to this single specimen.

Paratypes. Paratypes are specimens that the person making the original description examined while carrying out the work.

Topotype. These are specimens collected from the same locality as the type material (although not necessarily at the same time). Again, they have no official standing, but if a museum has such material it is usually well worth seeing. I can vouch for the fact that with marine invertebrates, topotypical material of the species you are seeking is much more likely to belong to that species than material labeled with the same name but from thousands of miles away.

##### Chapter 6. Species Descriptions in Taxonomy Chapter

Objects without names cannot well be talked about or written about; without descriptions they cannot be identified and such knowledge as may have accumulated regarding them is sealed. – Gahan (1923:73)

There are many different kinds of taxonomic publications, ranging from short notes describing a single species to multivolume monographs and treatises

### Comments
Figure 1.1 New equipment and new habitats yield new species.

We do not have anything like a "species type" for cell types. 
--> Same is true for cell types!

Species descriptions are often published in “mixed” papers, in which the new species is described in conjunction with the results of research on its physiology, morphology, reproduction, ecology, and so on.

The other people who are likely to deal with subspecific variation are graduate students and professionals in genetics and conser- vation biology, who often end up studying variation within a species. They are almost the only biologists now doing “gamma” taxonomy, once considered to be the highest form of systematics.

Synopses summarize current knowledge of morphology, ecology, terminology, and classification of a group of organisms.

A taxonomic catalog (often spelled catalogue) usually describes the specimens or species of a group of organisms that are found in the collection ofparticular museum or herbarium.

A revision involves restudy ofa group to correct or improve its diagnosis, description, or phylogeny. As Mayr (1969) pointed out, this is one of the most important types of scientific publication for groups in which many new species are still being described.

In botany there is another category belowthe level ofa revision, called a conspectus, defined by Stace (1989) as an outline ofa revision

Monographs treat the systematics of a group in the most complete detail possible.

Because of the historical nature of taxonomic research, taxonomic publications will be used by generations of taxonomists.

##### Chapter 8. Naming Species: Etymology
Words are in themselves among the most interesting objects of study, andthe names ofanimals andplants are worthy ofmore consideration than Biologists are inclinedto give them. –Savory (1962:vii)




# Template 

## Title
[citation]
### Highlights



### Comments