# Supplementary notes

A set of notes that may be incorporated into the final text, or become appendices, or end up as blog posts somewhere. 

## What to do when two researchers disagree on a definition?

Cell type names are notoriously ambiguous and one definition might collide with an other, specially regarding the natural language name used to described. There are many different, equally valid definitions of a "dendritic cell." I do not aim to solve this problem from a societal standpoint. However, from a computational-ontology standpoint, there is one simple solution: split the concept. 

This approach is similar to King Solomon's solution in a famous bible story, called the [Judgement of Solomon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Judgment_of_Solomon). In a dispute between two women that claimed to be the mothers of a child, the solution of the king was simple: split the baby. However, babies are notoriously indivisible, and the true mother did not really like the idea. 

It may be that some scientists are attached to their names, as mothers are to their babies. However, unlike babies, namings can be divided. Each of the scientists gets to name their specific conceptualization however they choose. Many names might "collide" in that way, and that is okay. Under the hood, however, the names refer to different identifiers. Computationally there would be no ambiguity. Then, it is just a matter of the researcher to respect the choice of their peers of calling something by the _wrong_ name, as long as the identifier is correct.


Splitting concepts upon conflicts in the end is more the multiplication of bread and fish in the [Feeding the multitude](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Feeding_the_multitude) episode, and everyone gets to eat.


But ontologies are different from ordinary babies and magical fish. The splitting of concepts would not only create new concepts, but leave a trace. They would be immediate subclasses of their conjunction. An equally valid superclass that can be defined by "a cell containing characteristics of any of their subclasses".

In a parallel with text-book mitosis, the concept gets divided in two new, equally real concepts. And as we can trace cells in an animal to a single zygote, we can keep track of concepts while they keep dividing, whenever a new conflict pops up.   